The Project Gutenberg EBook of History of Ancient Pottery.  Volume 1 (of 2), by 
H. B. Walters

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: History of Ancient Pottery.  Volume 1 (of 2)
       Greek, Etruscan, and Roman

Author: H. B. Walters

Release Date: February 7, 2015 [EBook #48154]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF ANCIENT POTTERY, VOL 1 ***




Produced by KD Weeks, Chris Curnow and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)






Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical
effects. Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_. Bold
font is shown delimited by the ‘=’ character. Super- and subscripted
characters are shown as '^2' and '_{2}' respectively.

This text includes the rendering of ancient Greek inscriptions, using
the alphabets in a number of different regions, not all of which exist
in the unicode character set. It is not possible to render these
inscriptions in text without a wholesale loss of information about the
variant forms. Each inscription, therefore, is simply rendered using
modern Greek characters, including several archaic characters (koppa =
? and digamma= ?) which are supported in unicode fonts. These
inscriptions are better viewed, obviously, in the HTML or epub versions
which can be found at Project Gutenberg.

Minor errors and inconsistency in punctuation and formatting have been
silently corrected. Please see the transcriber’s note at the end of
this text for details regarding the handling of any other textual
issues encountered during its preparation.

Footnotes appeared in the printed text numbered sequentially on each
page. They have been renumbered to be unique across the text, and
gathered at the end of each chapter. The occasional references to them
by the original number have been changed.

Volume II of this text is available separately from Project Gutenberg
at:

    http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/48155

         ------------------------------------------------------




                       HISTORY OF ANCIENT POTTERY

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                                 PLATE I

[Illustration:

  KYLIX BY DURIS.
  THE LABOURS OF THESEUS.
  (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

                  ------------------------------------




                       HISTORY OF ANCIENT POTTERY
                       GREEK, ETRUSCAN, AND ROMAN

                     BY H. B. WALTERS, M.A., F.S.A.
                          BASED ON THE WORK OF
                              SAMUEL BIRCH

                             IN TWO VOLUMES
                                VOLUME I

                        WITH  300  ILLUSTRATIONS
                      INCLUDING 8 COLOURED PLATES

                             [ILLUSTRATION]

                                 LONDON
                   JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.
                                  1905

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               PRINTED BY
                     HAZELL, WATSON AND VINEY, LD.,
                         LONDON AND AYLESBURY.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                PREFACE


In 1857 Dr. Samuel Birch issued his well-known work on ancient pottery,
at that time almost the first attempt at dealing with the whole subject
in a comprehensive manner. Sixteen years later, in 1873, he brought out
a second edition, in some respects condensed, in others enlarged and
brought up to date. But it is curious to reflect that the succeeding
sixteen years should not only have doubled or even trebled the material
available for a study of this subject, but should even have
revolutionised that study. The year 1889 also saw the completion of the
excavations of the Acropolis at Athens, which did much to settle the
question of the chronology of Attic vases. Yet another sixteen years,
and if the increase in actual bulk of material is relatively not so
great, yet the advance in the study of pottery, especially that of the
primitive periods, has been astounding; and while in 1857, and even in
1873, it was impossible to do much more than collect and co-ordinate
material, in 1905 Greek ceramics have become one of the most advanced
and firmly based branches of classical archaeology.

It therefore implies no slur on the reputation of Samuel Birch’s work
that it has become out of date. Up till now it has remained the only
comprehensive treatise, and therefore the standard work, on the
subject; but of late years there has been a crying need, especially in
England, of a book which should place before students a condensed and
up-to-date account of Greek vases and of the present state of knowledge
of the subject. The present volumes, while following in the main the
plan adopted by Dr. Birch, necessarily deviate therefrom in some
important particulars. It has been decided to omit entirely the section
relating to Oriental pottery, partly from considerations of space,
partly from the impossibility of doing justice to the subject except in
a separate treatise; for the same reason the pottery of the Celts and
of Northern Europe has been ignored. Part I. of the present work,
dealing chiefly with the technical aspect of the subject, remains in
its main outlines much as it was thirty years ago; but the other
sections have been entirely re-written. For the historical account of
vase-painting in Birch’s second edition one chapter of forty pages
sufficed; it now extends to six chapters, or one quarter of the work.
The subjects on the vases, again, occupy four chapters instead of two;
and modern researches have made it possible to treat the subjects of
Etruscan and Roman pottery with almost the same scientific knowledge as
that of Greece.

A certain amount of repetition in the various sections will, it is
hoped, be pardoned on the ground that it was desirable to make each
section as far as possible complete in itself; and another detail which
may provoke unfavourable criticism is the old difficulty of the
spelling of Greek names and words. In regard to the latter the author
admits that consistency has not been attained, but his aim has been
rather to avoid unnecessary Latinising on the one hand and pedantry on
the other.

Finally, the author desires to express his warmest acknowledgments to
all who have been of assistance to him in his work, by their writings
or otherwise, especially to a friend, desiring to be nameless, who has
kindly read through the proofs and made many useful suggestions; to the
invaluable works of many foreign scholars, more particularly those of
M. Pottier, M. Salomon Reinach, and M. Déchelette, he owes a debt which
even a constant acknowledgment in the text hardly repays. Thanks are
also due to the Trustees of the British Museum for kind permission to
reproduce their blocks for Figs. 75, 109, 118, 125, 128, 131, 138, 185,
191, and 197, to M. Déchelette for permission to reproduce from his
work the vases given in Figs. 224, 226, and to the Committee of the
British School at Athens for similar facilities in regard to Plate XIV.
(pottery from Crete). Lastly, but by no means least, the author desires
to express to Mr. Hallam Murray his deep sense of obligation for the
warm interest he has shown in the work throughout and for the pains he
has taken to ensure the success of its outward appearance.

                                                                H. B. W.

LONDON, _January 1905_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          CONTENTS OF VOLUME I


                                                                    PAGE


 PREFACE                                                               v

 CONTENTS OF VOLUME I                                                 ix

 LIST OF PLATES IN VOLUME I                                         xiii

 LIST OF TEXT-ILLUSTRATIONS IN VOLUME I                               xv

 BIBLIOGRAPHY OF ANCIENT POTTERY                                     xix

 NOTE ON ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THIS WORK                           xxxvi


                                 PART I

                        GREEK POTTERY IN GENERAL

                               CHAPTER I
                             _INTRODUCTORY_

 Importance of study of ancient monuments—Value of pottery as
 evidence of early civilisation—Invention of the art—Use of
 brick in Babylonia—The potter’s wheel—Enamel and
 glazes—Earliest Greek pottery—Use of study of
 vases—Ethnological, historical, mythological, and artistic
 aspects—Earliest writings on the subject—The “Etruscan”
 theory—History of the study of Greek vases—Artistic,
 epexegetic, and historical methods—The vase-collections of
 Europe and their history—List of existing collections              1–30


                               CHAPTER II

         _SITES AND CIRCUMSTANCES OF DISCOVERY OF GREEK VASES_

 Historical and geographical limits of subject—Description of
 Greek tombs—Tombs in Cyprus, Cyrenaica, Sicily,
 Italy—Condition of vases when found—Subsequent
 restorations—Imitations and forgeries—Prices of vases—Sites
 on which painted vases have been found: Athens, Corinth,
 Boeotia, Greek islands, Crimea, Asia Minor, Cyprus, North
 Africa, Italy, Etruria—Vulci discoveries—Southern Italy,
 Sicily                                                            31–88


                              CHAPTER III

                           _THE USES OF CLAY_

 Technical terms—Sun-dried clay and unburnt bricks—Use of
 these in Greece—Methods of manufacture—Roof-tiles and
 architectural decorations in terracotta—Antefixal
 ornaments—Sicilian and Italian systems—Inscribed
 tiles—Sarcophagi—Braziers—Moulds—Greek lamps—Sculpture in
 terracotta—Origin of art—Large statues in
 terracotta—Statuettes—Processes of
 manufacture—Moulding—Colouring—Vases with plastic
 decoration—Reliefs—Toys—Types and uses of
 statuettes—Porcelain and enamelled wares—Hellenistic and
 Roman enamelled fabrics                                          89–130


                               CHAPTER IV

                    _USES AND SHAPES OF GREEK VASES_

 Mention of painted vases in literature—Civil and domestic
 use of pottery—Measures of capacity—Use in daily
 life—Decorative use—Religious and votive uses—Use in funeral
 ceremonies—Shapes and their names—Ancient and modern
 classifications—Vases for storage—Pithos—Wine-
 amphora—Amphora—Stamnos—Hydria—Vases for
 mixing—Krater—Deinos or Lebes—Cooking-vessels—Vases for
 pouring wine—Oinochoë and variants—Ladles—Drinking-
 cups—Names recorded by
 Athenaeus—Kotyle—Skyphos—Kantharos—Kylix—Phiale—
 Rhyton—Dishes—Oil-
 vases—Lekythos—Alabastron—Pyxis—Askos—Moulded vases             131–201


                               CHAPTER V

                         _TECHNICAL PROCESSES_

 Nature of clay—Places whence obtained—Hand-made
 vases—Invention of potter’s wheel—Methods of
 modelling—Moulded vases and relief-
 decoration—Baking—Potteries and furnaces—Painted vases and
 their classification—Black varnish—Methods of
 painting—Instruments and colours employed—Status of potters
 in antiquity                                                    202–233


                                PART II

                     HISTORY OF GREEK VASE-PAINTING

                               CHAPTER VI

                          _PRIMITIVE FABRICS_

 Introductory—Cypriote Bronze-Age
 pottery—Classification—Mycenaean pottery in Cyprus—Graeco-
 Phoenician fabrics—Shapes and decoration—Hellenic and later
 vases—Primitive pottery in Greece—Troy—Thera and
 Cyclades—Crete—Recent discoveries—Mycenaean
 pottery—Classification and distribution—Centres of
 fabric—Ethnography and chronology                               234–276


                              CHAPTER VII

                   _RISE OF VASE-PAINTING IN GREECE_

 Geometrical decoration—Its origin—Distribution of
 pottery—Shapes and ornamentation of vases—Subjects—Dipylon
 vases—Boeotian Geometrical wares—Chronology—Proto-Attic
 fabrics—Phaleron ware—Later Boeotian vases—Melian
 amphorae—Corinth and its pottery—“Proto-Corinthian”
 vases—Vases with imbrications and floral decoration—Incised
 lines and ground-ornaments—Introduction of figure-
 subjects—Chalcidian vases—“Tyrrhenian Amphorae”                 277–327


                              CHAPTER VIII

                        _VASE-PAINTING IN IONIA_

 General characteristics—Classification—Mycenaean
 influence—Rhodian pottery—“Fikellura” ware—Asia Minor
 fabrics—Cyrenaic vases—Naukratis and its pottery—Daphnae
 ware—Caeretan hydriae—Other Ionic fabrics—“Pontic”
 vases—Early painting in Ionia—Clazomenae sarcophagi             328–367


                               CHAPTER IX

                     _ATHENIAN BLACK-FIGURED VASES_

 Definition of “black-figured”—The François vase—Technical
 and stylistic details—Shapes—Decorative patterns—Subjects
 and types—Artists’ signatures—Exekias and Amasis—Minor
 Artists—Nikosthenes—Andokides—“Affected” vases—Panathenaic
 amphorae—Vases from the Kabeirion—Opaque painting on black
 ground—Vase-painting and literary tradition—Early Greek
 painting and its subsequent development                         368–399


                               CHAPTER X

                          _RED-FIGURED VASES_

 Origin of red-figure style—Date of introduction—?a???-names
 and historical personages—Technical characteristics—Draughts
 manship—Shapes—Ornamentation—Subjects and types—Subdivisions
 of style—Severe period and artists—Strong
 period—Euphronios—Duris, Hieron, and Brygos—Fine
 period—Influence of Polygnotos—Later fine period—Boeotian
 local fabric                                                    400–453


                               CHAPTER XI

                    _WHITE-GROUND AND LATER FABRICS_

 Origin and character of white-ground painting—Outline
 drawing and polychromy—Funeral lekythi—Subjects and
 types—Decadence of Greek vase-painting—Rise of new
 centres—Kertch, Cyrenaica, and Southern
 Italy—Characteristics of the latter
 fabrics—Shapes—Draughtsmanship—Influence of Tragedy and
 Comedy—Subjects—Paestum fabric—Lucanian, Campanian, and
 Apulian fabrics—Gnathia vases—Vases modelled in form of
 figures—Imitations of metal—Vases with reliefs—“Megarian”
 bowls—Bolsena ware and Calene phialae                           454–504




                       LIST OF PLATES IN VOLUME I

 (_Except where otherwise noted the objects are in the British Museum_)


      PLATE


         I. Kylix signed by Duris: Labours of Theseus
            (_colours_)                                      Frontispiece

                                                             TO FACE PAGE

        II. Archaic terracotta antefixes                               98

       III. Restoration of temple at Civita Lavinia                   100

        IV. Greek lamps and “brazier-handles”                         106

         V. Moulds for terracotta figures                             114

        VI. Terracotta vases from Southern Italy                      118

       VII. “Melian” reliefs                                          120

      VIII. Archaic terracotta figures                                122

        IX. Terracotta figures of fine style                          124

         X. Porcelain and enamelled wares                             128

        XI. Cypriote Bronze-Age pottery                               242

       XII. Mycenaean vases found in Cyprus                           246

      XIII. Cypriote “Graeco-Phoenician” pottery                      252

       XIV. Example of Kamaraes ware from Palaiokastro,
            Crete (from _Brit. School Annual_)                        266

        XV. Mycenaean vases (_colours_)                               272

       XVI. Subjects from the Aristonoös krater in the
            Vatican (from _Wiener Vorl._)                             296

      XVII. Phaleron, Boeotian, and Photo-Corinthian vases            300

     XVIII. Melian amphora in Athens (from Conze)                     302

       XIX. Proto-Corinthian and Early Corinthian vases               308

        XX. Corinthian pyxis and Rhodian oinochoë
            (_colours_)                                               312

       XXI. Later Corinthian vases with figure subjects               316

      XXII. Chalcidian vase in Bibl. Nat., Paris: Herakles
            and Geryon; chariot                                       320

     XXIII. “Tyrrhenian” Amphora: The death of Polyxena               324

      XXIV. Rhodian and Naucratite wares                              336

       XXV. Situla from Daphnae; later Ionic vase in South
            Kensington                                                352

      XXVI. Caeretan hydria (_colours_)                               354

     XXVII. Painted sarcophagus from Clazomenae                       364

    XXVIII. The François vase in Florence, general view
            (from Furtwaengler and Reichhold, _Gr. Vasenm._)          370

      XXIX. Attic black-figured amphorae                              380

       XXX. Vases by Nikosthenes                                      384

      XXXI. Obverse of vase by Andokides: Warriors playing
            draughts (B.F.)                                           386

     XXXII. Reverse of vase by Andokides: Herakles and the
            Nemean lion (R.F.)                                        386

    XXXIII. Panathenaic amphora, earlier style                        388

     XXXIV. Panathenaic amphora, later style                          390

      XXXV. Vases with opaque figures on black ground (Brit.
            Mus. and Louvre)                                          394

     XXXVI. Red-figured “Nolan” amphorae and lekythos                 412

    XXXVII. Cups of Epictetan style                                   422

   XXXVIII. Kylix at Munich signed by Euphronios: Herakles
            and Geryon (from Furtwaengler and Reichhold)              432

     XXXIX. Kylikes by Duris at Berlin and in the style of
            Brygos at Corneto (from Baumeister)                       436

        XL. Vases signed by Sotades (Brit. Mus. and Boston)           444

       XLI. Hydria signed by Meidias                                  446

      XLII. Vases of “late fine” style (_colours_)                    448

     XLIII. Polychrome white-ground vases (_colours_)                 456

      XLIV. Campanian and Apulian vases                               484

       XLV. Apulian sepulchral vase (colours)                         486

      XLVI. Vases modelled in various forms                           492

     XLVII. Archaic vase in Athens with reliefs (from
            ?f?µe??? ???a????????)                                    496

    XLVIII. Vases of black ware with reliefs (Hellenistic
            period)                                                   500




                     LIST OF TEXT-ILLUSTRATIONS IN
                                VOLUME I

    FIG.                                                           PAGE


      1. Coffin containing vases, from  _Stackelberg_
         Athens                                                      34

      2. Bronze-Age tombs in Cyprus     _Ath. Mitth._                35

      3. Tomb at Gela (Sicily) with     _Ashmol. Vases_
         vases                                                       37

      4. Campana tomb at Veii           _Campana_                    39

      5. Map of Greece                                               47

      6. Map of Asia Minor and the
         Archipelago                                                 63

      7. Map of Cyprus                                               66

      8. Map of Italy                                                70

      9. Diagram of roof-tiling,        _Durm_
         Heraion, Olympia                                            93

     10. Antefix from Marathon          _Brit. Mus._                 99

     11. Inscribed tiles from Acarnania _Brit. Mus._
         and Corfu                                                  102

     12. Ostrakon of Megakles           _Benndorf_                  103

     13. Ostrakon of Xanthippos         _Jahrbuch_                  103

     14. Hemikotylion from Kythera      _Brit. Mus._                135

     15. Child playing with jug         _Brit. Mus._                137

     16. Dedication to Apollo           _Brit. Mus._
         (Naukratis)                                                139

     17. Youth with votive tablet       _Benndorf_                  140

     18. Vases used in sacrifice        _Furtwaengler and
                                        Reichhold_                  141

     19. Funeral lekythos with vases    _Brit. Mus._
         inside tomb                                                143

     20. Vases placed on tomb (Lucanian _Brit. Mus._
         hydria)                                                    144

     21. Pithos from Knossos                                        152

     22. Greek wine-jars                _Brit. Mus._                154

     23. Amphora-stamps from Rhodes     _Dumont._                   156

     24. Amphora-stamps from Thasos     _Dumont._                   158

     25. “Tyrrhenian” amphora                                       160

     26. Panathenaic amphora                                        160

     27. Panel-amphora                                              161

     28. Red-bodied amphora                                         161

     29. “Nolan” amphora                                            162

     30. Apulian amphora                                            162

     31. “Pelike”                                                   163

     32. Stamnos                                                    164

     33. “Lekane”                                                   164

     34. Hydria                                                     166

     35. Kalpis                                                     166

     36. Krater with column-handles                                 169

     37. Volute-handled krater                                      170

     38. Calyx-krater                                               170

     39. Bell-krater                                                170

     40. Lucanian krater                                            172

     41. Psykter                                                    173

     42. Deinos or lebes                                            173

     43. Oinochoë (7th century)                                     177

     44. Oinochoë (5th century)                                     177

     45. Prochoös                                                   178

     46. Olpe                                                       178

     47. Epichysis                                                  179

     48. Kyathos                                                    179

     49. Kotyle                                                     184

     50. Kantharos                                                  188

     51. Kylix (earlier form)                                       190

     52. Kylix (later form)                                         191

     53. Phiale                                                     191

     54. Rhyton                                                     193

     55. Pinax                                                      194

     56. Lekythos                                                   196

     57. Lekythos (later form)                                      196

     58. Alabastron                                                 197

     59. Aryballos                                                  197

     60. Pyxis                                                      198

     61. Epinetron or Onos                                          199

     62. Askos                                                      200

     63. Apulian askos                                              200

     64. Guttus                                                     200

     65. Potter’s wheel, from           _Ant. Denkm._
         Corinthian pinakes                                         207

     66. Potter’s wheel (vase of about  _Ath. Mitth._
         500 B.C.)                                                  208

     67. Boy polishing vase; interior   _Blümner_
         of pottery                                                 213

     68. Seilenos as potter                                         216

     69. Interior of furnace            _Ant. Denkm._
         (Corinthian pinax)                                         217

     70. Interior of pottery            _Ath. Mitth._               218

     71. Red-figured fragment,
         incomplete                                                 222

     72. Studio of vase-painter         _Blümner_                   223

     73. Vase-painter varnishing cup    _Jahrbuch_                  227

     74. Vase-painter using feather-    _Jahrbuch_
         brush                                                      228

     75. Cypriote jug with concentric   _Brit. Mus._
         circles                                                    251

     76. Cypriote vase from Ormidhia    _Baumeister_                254

     77. “Owl-vase” from Troy           _Schliemann_                258

     78. Deep cup from Troy             _Schliemann_                259

     79. Vase in form of pig from Troy  _Schliemann_                259

     80. Double-necked vase from Troy   _Schliemann_                259

     81. Vases from Thera               _Baumeister_                261

     82. Mycenaean vases with marine    _Brit. Mus._
         subjects                                                   273

     83. Ornamentation on Geometrical   _Perrot_
         vases                                                      283

     84. Geometrical vase with panels   _Brit. Mus._                284

     85. Boeotian Geometrical vases     _Jahrbuch_                  288

     86. Coffer from Thebes (Boeotian   _Jahrbuch_
         Geometrical)                                               289

     87. Burgon lebes                   _Brit. Mus._                296

     88. Warrior vase from Mycenae      _Schliemann_                297

     89. Proto-Attic vase from Vourva   _Ath. Mitth._               299

     90. The Dodwell pyxis (cover)      _Baumeister_                316

     91. Vases of Samian or “Fikellura” _Brit. Mus._
         style                                                      337

     92. The Arkesilaos cup (Bibl.      _Baumeister_
         Nat.)                                                      342

     93. Cyrenaic cup with Kyrene       _Brit. Mus._                344

     94. Naukratis fragment with “mixed _Brit. Mus._
         technique”                                                 346

     95. “Egyptian situla” from Daphnae _Brit. Mus._                351

     96. Kylix by Exekias               _Wiener Vorl._              381

     97. Vase by Amasis: Perseus        _Brit. Mus._
         slaying Medusa                                             382

     98. Vase from Temple of Kabeiri    _Brit. Mus._                392

     99. Diagram of rendering of eye on _Brit. Mus. Cat._
         Attic vase                                                 408

    100. Palmettes under handles (early _Jahrbuch_
         R.F.)                                                      414

    101. Palmettes under handles (later _Riegl_
         R.F.)                                                      415

    102. Development of maeander and    _Brit. Mus. Cat._
         cross pattern                                              416

    103. Krater of Polygnotan style:    _Mon. dell’ Inst._
         Slaying of Niobids (Louvre)                                442

    104. Boeotian kylix                 _Brit. Mus._                452

    105. Burlesque scene: Herakles and  _Jahrbuch_
         Auge                                                       474

    106. Apulian sepulchral vase        _Brit. Mus._                477

    107. Vase by Assteas in Madrid      _Baumeister_                480

    108. Lucanian krater: Departure of  _Brit. Mus._
         warrior                                                    482

    109. Hydria with opaque painting on _Brit. Mus._
         black ground                                               489

    110. Phiale with Latin inscription  _Brit. Mus._                490

                    BIBLIOGRAPHY OF ANCIENT POTTERY

                                 PART I

                  PERIODICALS DEALING WITH THE SUBJECT

_American Journal of Archaeology._ Baltimore and Boston, 1885, etc. In
    progress.  (_Amer. Journ. of Arch._)

_Annali dell’ Instituto di corrispondenza archeologica._ Rome, 1829–85.
    (_Ann. dell’ Inst._) Plates of vases re-edited by S. Reinach in
    _Répertoire des Vases_, vol. i. (1899).

_Annual of the British School at Athens._ London, 1894, etc. In
    progress. (_Brit. School Annual._)

_Antike Denkmäler_, herausgegeben vom kaiserl. deutschen Institut.
    Berlin, 1887, etc. In progress. A supplementary atlas to the
    _Jahrbuch_. (_Ant. Denkm._)

_Archaeologia_, or miscellaneous tracts relating to antiquity. London,
    1770, etc. Issued by the Society of Antiquaries. In progress.

_Archaeological Journal_, issued by the Royal Archaeological Institute.
    London, 1845, etc. In progress. Numerous articles on Roman pottery,
    etc. in Britain. (_Arch. Journ._)

_Archaeologische Zeitung._ Berlin, 1843–85. Vols. vii.–xxv. have the
    secondary title _Denkmäler, Forschungen und Berichte_. (_Arch.
    Zeit._) Plates of vases re-edited by S. Reinach in _Répertoire_,
    vol. i. (1899).

_Archaeologischer Anzeiger._ Berlin, 1886, etc. In progress; a
    supplement bound up with the _Jahrbuch_ (new acquisitions of
    museums, reports of meetings, etc.). (_Arch. Anzeiger._)

_Archaeologische-epigraphische Mittheilungen aus Oesterreich-Ungarn._
    Vienna, 1877–97. Now superseded by _Jahreshefte_. (_Arch.-epigr.
    Mitth. aus Oesterr._)

_Athenische Mittheilungen._ Athens, 1876, etc. In progress. Organ of
    the German Archaeological Institute at Athens. (_Ath. Mitth._)

_Berichte der sächsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften._ Leipzig,
    1846, etc. In progress. Important articles by O. Jahn, 1853–67.
    (_Ber. d. sächs. Gesellsch._)

_Bonner Jahrbücher. Jahrbücher des Vereins von Alterthumsfreunden im
    Rheinlande._ Bonn, 1842, etc. In progress. Important for notices of
    pottery, etc., found in Germany, and for recent articles by
    Dragendorff and others on Roman pottery (Arretine and provincial
    wares, vols. xcvi., ci., cii., ciii.). (_Bonner Jahrb._)

_Bulletin de Correspondance Hellénique._ Athens and Paris, 1877, etc.
    In progress. (_Bull. de Corr. Hell._)

_Bullettino archeologico Napolitano._ Naples, 1842–62. Ser. i. 1842–48.
    New ser. 1853–62. Re-edited by S. Reinach, 1899. (_Bull. Arch.
    Nap._)

_Bullettino dell’ Instituto di corrispondenza archeologica._ Rome,
    1829–85. Chiefly records of discoveries in Italy and elsewhere.
    (_Bull. dell’ Inst._)

_Classical Review._ London, 1887, etc. In progress. Reviews of
    archaeological books and records of discoveries.

_Comptes-Rendus de la Commission impériale archéologique._ Petersburg,
    1859–88. Edited by L. Stephani. With folio atlas, re-edited by S.
    Reinach in _Répertoire_, vol. i. (1899). (Stephani,
    _Comptes-Rendus_.)

?f?µe??? ???a????????. Athens, 1883, etc. (new series). In progress.
    Plates of vases, 1883–94, re-edited by S. Reinach in _Répertoire_,
    vol. i. (1899). (?f. ???.)

_Gazette archéologique._ Paris, 1875–89. (_Gaz. Arch._)

_Hermes._ Zeitschrift für classische Philologie. Berlin, 1866, etc. In
    progress.

_Jahrbuch des kaiserlichen deutschen archaeologischen Instituts._
    Berlin, 1886, etc. In progress. With _Arch. Anzeiger (q.v.)_ as
    supplement and _Antike Denkmäler (q.v.)_ as atlas. (_Jahrbuch._)

_Jahreshefte des oesterreichischen archaeologischen Institutes._
    Vienna, 1898, etc. In progress. (_Jahreshefte._)

_Journal of Hellenic Studies._ London, 1880, etc. In progress. With
    atlas in 4to of plates to vols. i.–viii., and supplementary papers
    (No. 4 on Phylakopi). (_J.H.S._)

_Journal of the British Archaeological Association._ London, 1845, etc.
    In progress. A few articles on Roman pottery in Britain. (_Journ.
    Brit. Arch. Assoc._)

_Monumenti antichi_, pubblicati per cura della R. Accad. dei Lincei.
    Milan, 1890, etc. In progress. (_Mon. antichi._)

_Monumenti inediti dell’ Instituto di corrispondenza archeologica._
    Rome, 1829–85 (with supplementary volume, 1891). Re-edited (the
    plates of vases) by S. Reinach in _Répertoire_, vol. i. (1899).
    (_Mon. dell’ Inst._)

_Monuments Grecs_, publiés par l’Association pour l’encouragement des
    Études grecques. Paris, 1872–98. (_Mon. Grecs._)

_Monuments Piot._ Fondation Eugène Piot. Monuments et mémoires publiés
    par l’Académie des Inscriptions. Paris, 1894, etc. In progress.

_Museo italiano di antichità classica._ 3 vols. Florence, 1885–90.
    Plates of vases re-edited by S. Reinach in _Répertoire_, vol. i.
    (1899). (_Ath. Mitth._)

_Notizie degli Scavi di Antichità_, communicate alla R. Accademia dei
    Lincei. Rome and Milan, 1876, etc. In progress. Important as a
    record of recent discoveries in Italy and Sicily. (_Notizie degli
    Scavi._)

_Philologus._ Zeitschrift für das klassische Alterthum. Göttingen,
    1846, etc. In progress. With occasional supplementary volumes.

_Revue archéologique._ Paris, 1844, etc. In progress (four series, each
    numbered separately). (_Rev. Arch._)

_Römische Mittheilungen._ Rome, 1886, etc. In progress. Organ of German
    Institute at Rome. (_Röm. Mitth._)

                                PART II

                          WORKS ON GREEK VASES

ADAMEK (L.). _Unsignierte Vasen des Amasis._ Prague, 1895 (Prager
    Studien, Heft v.).

AMELUNG (W.). _Personnificierung des Lebens in der Natur in den
    Vasenbildern der hellenistischen Zeit._ Munich, 1888. See also
    Florence.

ANDERSON (W. F. C.). See Engelmann and Schreiber.

_Antiquités du Bosphore cimmérien._ 3 vols. Petersburg, 1854, fol.
    Vases, etc., found in the Crimea. (Re-edited in 8vo by S. Reinach,
    1892.)

ARNDT (P.). _Studien zur Vasenkunde._ Leipzig, 1887. Adopts Brunn’s
    theory of the late Italian origin of black-figured vases.

_Athens_ (National Museum). _Catalogue des Vases peints_, by M.
    COLLIGNON and L. COUVE. Paris, 1902. With atlas of photographic
    plates. The fragments from the Acropolis form the subject of a
    separate catalogue (in preparation).

_Aus der Anomia._ Collected articles, some relating to vases. Berlin,
    1890.


BAUMEISTER (A.). _Denkmäler des klassischen Alterthums._ 3 vols.
    Munich, 1884–88. Excellent illustrations of numerous vases
    accompanying the articles, which are arranged alphabetically in
    dictionary-form. The article _Vasenkunde_, by Von Rohden, is
    useful, but now somewhat out of date. (Baumeister.)

BEGER (L.). _Thesaurus Brandenburgicus selectus._ 3 vols. Köln, 1696,
    fol. Publishes vases belonging to the Elector of Brandenburg (see
    Vol. I. p. 16).

BENNDORF (O.). _Griechische und sicilische Vasenbilder._ Berlin,
    1869–83, fol. Chiefly funerary vases and later fabrics. (Benndorf,
    _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._) See also _Wiener Vorlegeblätter_.

_Berlin._ _Beschreibung der Vasensammlung im Antiquarium_, by A.
    FURTWAENGLER. Berlin, 1885. 2 vols. With plates of shapes.

BLOCH (L.). _Die zuschauenden Götter in den rothfig. Vasengemälden._
    Leipzig, 1888.

BLÜMNER (H.). _Technologie und Terminologie der Gewerbe und Künste._ 4
    vols. Leipzig, 1875–86. (Vol. ii. _Arbeit in Thon_, for pottery and
    terracottas; vol. iii. for building construction.) Out of date in
    some particulars, but still exceedingly useful, and fairly well
    illustrated. (Blümner, _Technologie_.)

BOECKH (A.) and others. _Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum._ 4 vols.
    Berlin, 1828–77, fol. Vol. iv. contains many vase-inscriptions.
    (Boeckh, _C.I.G._)

BÖHLAU (J.). _Aus ionischen und italischen Nekropolen._ Leipzig, 1898,
    4to. Indispensable for the study of Ionic vase-fabrics. (Böhlau,
    _Aus ion. u. ital. Nekrop._)

_Bologna_ (Museo Civico). _Catalogo dei vasi_, by G. PELLEGRINI.
    Bologna, 1900. (Plates and cuts.)

BOLTE (J.). _De monumentis ad Odysseam pertinentibus capita selecta._
    Berlin, 1882, 8vo.

_Bonn._ _Das akademische Kunstmuseum zu Bonn_, by R. KEKULÉ. Bonn, 1872.

_Bonner Studien._ Aufsätze aus der Alterthumswissenschaft R. Kekulé
    gewidmet. Berlin, 1890. Collected papers, including several on
    Greek vases.

_Boston._ _Catalogue of Greek, Etruscan, and Roman vases in the Museum
    of Fine Arts._ Boston, 1893. By E. ROBINSON. Now withdrawn, owing
    to re-numbering and extensive subsequent accessions, for which see
    _Boston Museum Reports_ (below).

_Boston Museum Reports_, 1895, etc. In progress from 1896. Issued
    annually, with full details of new acquisitions, describing many
    unique specimens. (_Boston Mus. Report._)

BÖTTIGER (C. A.). _Griechische Vasengemälde._ Weimar and Magdeburg,
    1797–1800.

—— _Kleine Schriften._ 3 vols. Dresden, 1837–39.

_Bourguignon Collection._ _Sale Catalogue_, 18 March 1901. Paris, 1901.
    (Best vases not included.)

BRANTEGHEM (A. VAN). See Froehner.

_British Museum._ _Catalogue of the Greek and Etruscan Vases._ Vol. i.,
    by C. Smith, in preparation. Vol. ii., Black-figured vases, by H.
    B. Walters (1893). Vol. iii., Red-figured vases, by C. Smith
    (1896). Vol. iv., Vases of the later period, by H. B. Walters
    (1896). (Referred to as _B. M. Cat. of Vases_, or B.M. with number
    of vase.)

—— _Designs on Greek Vases_, by A. S. Murray and C. Smith. 1894, fol.
    (Plates of interiors of R.F. kylikes.)

—— _White Athenian Vases_, by A. S. Murray and A. H. Smith. 1896, fol.

—— _Terracotta Sarcophagi_, by A. S. Murray. 1898, fol. (The sarcophagi
    from Clazomenae, Kameiros, and Cervetri; see Chapters VIII. and
    XVIII.)

—— _Excavations in Cyprus_ (Enkomi, Curium, Amathus). 1900. By A. S.
    Murray, H. B. Walters, and A. H. Smith.

BRÖNDSTED (P. O.). _A brief description of 32 ancient Greek painted
    vases, lately found at Vulci by M. Campanari._ London, 1832, 8vo.

BRONGNIART (A.). _Traité des Arts Céramiques_, ou des Poteries
    considerées dans leur Histoire, leur Pratique, et leur Théorie. 3rd
    edn., 1877. 2 vols., with Atlas. (Brongniart, _Traité_.) See also
    Sèvres.

BRUNN (H.). _Geschichte der griechischen Künstler._ 2 vols. Stuttgart,
    1859. The second volume has some account of the vase-painters then
    known.

—— _Probleme in der Geschichte der Vasenmalerei._ Munich, 1871, 4to.
    Theory of Italian origin of B.F. vases.

—— _Neue Probleme in der Geschichte der Vasenmalerei._ Munich, 1886.

—— _Griechische Kunstgeschichte._ 2 vols. (incomplete). Munich,
    1893–97. Deals with some of the earlier fabrics.

—— _Kleine Schriften._ Vol. i. Leipzig, 1898. In progress. See also Lau.

BULLE (H.). _Die Silene in der archaischen Kunst._ Munich, 1893.

_Burlington Fine Arts Club._ _Catalogue of objects of Greek Ceramic
    Art_ (exhibited in 1888), by W. Froehner. (Mostly vases from
    Branteghem Collection.)

—— _Catalogue of Exhibition of Ancient Greek Art_, 1903, by E. Strong
    and others. A revised _édition de luxe_ (1904) with plates.


_Cambridge_ (Fitzwilliam Museum). _A Catalogue of the Greek vases in
    the Fitzwilliam Museum_, by E. A. GARDNER. Cambridge, 1897. With
    plates.

CANESSA (C. and E.). _Collection d’Antiquités_, à l’Hôtel Drouot, 11
    May 1903, 4to. Paris, 1903. A sale catalogue of an anonymous
    collection containing several interesting vases.

CANINO (Prince Lucien Bonaparte of). _Muséum Étrusque de L. Bonaparte,
    prince de Canino._ Fouilles de 1828 à 1829. Vases peints avec
    inscriptions. Viterbo, 1829, 4to. With atlas of plates, of which
    only one part was published.

—— _Catalogo di scelte Antichità Etrusche trovate negli Scavi del Pr.
    di Canino_, 1828–29. Viterbo, 1829, 4to.

CAYLUS (A. C. P. de). _Recueil d’antiquités égyptiennes, étrusques,
    grecques et romaines._ 7 vols. Paris, 1752–67, 4to. (Vases given in
    vols. i. and ii.)

CESNOLA (L. P. di). _Cyprus: its ancient cities, tombs, and temples._
    (With a chapter on the pottery, by A. S. Murray.) London, 1877, 8vo.

CHRISTIE (J.). _Disquisitions upon the Painted Vases_, and their
    connection with the Eleusinian Mysteries. London, 1825, 4to. (See
    Vol. I. p. 21.)

COLLIGNON (M.). See Athens, Rayet.

_Commentationes philologae in honorem T. Mommseni._ Berlin, 1877, 4to.
    Several useful papers on vases.

CONZE (A.). _Melische Thongefässe._ Leipzig, 1862. Folio plates.

—— _Zur Geschichte der Anfänge griechischer Kunst._ Vienna, 1870, 8vo.
    See also _Wiener Vorlegeblätter_.

COREY (A. D.). _De Amazonum antiquissimis figuris._ Berlin, 1891, 8vo.

COUVE (L.). See Athens.


DAREMBERG (C.) and SAGLIO (E.), and subsequently E. POTTIER.
    _Dictionnaire des antiquités grecques et romaines._ Paris, 1873,
    etc. In progress (to M in 1904). (Daremberg and Saglio.) Special
    reference should be made to the articles Figlinum, Forma, Lucerna,
    and those on vase-shapes. The bibliographies are very exhaustive.

DENNIS (G.). _The Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria._ 2 vols. London,
    1878 (2nd edn.), 8vo. Introductory matter on vases antiquated;
    useful as record of discoveries, etc. (Dennis, _Etruria_.)

DES VERGERS (N.). _Étrurie et les Étrusques._ 2 vols. and atlas. Paris,
    1862–64. Some fine vases published.

DISNEY (J.). _Museum Disneianum_, being a description of a collection
    of various ancient fictile vases in the possession of J. D. (now at
    Cambridge). London, 1846, 4to.

DUBOIS-MAISONNEUVE (A.). _Introduction à l’étude des vases antiques
    d’argile peints._ Paris, 1817, fol. (Dubois-Maisonneuve, _Introd._)

DUMONT (A.). _Inscriptions céramiques de Grèce._ Paris, 1872, 8vo.
    (Inscriptions on handles of wine-amphorae.)

—— _Vases peints de la Grèce propre._ Paris, 1873. (Reprinted from the
    _Gazette des Beaux Arts_.)

—— _Les Céramiques de la Grèce propre_; histoire de la peinture des
    vases grecs depuis les origines jusqu'au V. siècle avant
    Jésus-Christ. Illustrations by J. Chaplain. Revised by E. Pottier.
    2 vols. Paris, 1888–90. Vol. i., on earlier vase fabrics (now
    becoming out of date); plates mostly of later vases. Vol. ii.,
    miscellaneous papers (vases, terracottas, etc.). (Dumont-Pottier.)


ENDT (J.). _Beiträge zur ionischen Vasenmalerei._ Prague, 1899, 8vo.
    (Endt, _Ion. Vasenm._)

ENGELMANN (R.). _Bilder-Atlas zum Homer._ Leipzig, 1889. Translated by
    W. F. C. Anderson: _Pictorial Atlas to Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey_,
    London, 1892. (Engelmann-Anderson.)

—— _Archaeologische Studien zu den Tragikern._ Berlin, 1900. _Eranos
    Vindobonensis_ (collected papers). Vienna, 1893, 8vo.


FEA (C.). _Storia dei vasi fittili dipinti_ che si trovano nell’ antica
    Etruria. Rome, 1832. (Dealing with “Etruscan” theory.)

_Festschrift für Johannes Overbeck_ (collected papers). Leipzig, 1893,
    4to.

_Festschrift für Otto Benndorf zu seinem 60. Geburtstage gewidmet_
    (collected papers). Vienna, 1898, 4to.

FIORELLI (G.). _Notizia dei vasi dipinti rinvenuti a Cuma nel 1856._
    Naples, 1857. Plates reproduced in _Bull. Arch. Nap._ (_q.v._).

FLASCH (A.). _Angebliche Argonautenbilder._ Munich, 1870.

—— _Die Polychromie der griechischen Vasenbilder._ Würzburg, 1875.

_Florence._ _Führer durch die Antiken in Florenz_, by W. AMELUNG.
    Munich, 1897.

FÖRSTER (P. R.). _Hochzeit des Zeus und der Hera_, Relief der
    Schaubert’schen Sammlung in .... Breslau. Breslau, 1867, 4to.

—— _Der Raub und die Rückkehr der Persephone._ Stuttgart, 1873.

FROEHNER (W.). _Choix de vases grecs inédits de la collection du Prince
    Napoléon._ Paris, 1867, fol.

—— _Deux peintures de vases grecs de la nécropole de Kameiros._ Paris,
    1871, fol.

—— _Musées de France._ Recueil de monuments antiques. Paris, 1873, fol.

—— _Collection de M. Albert B_(_arre_). Paris, 1878, 4to. (Sale
    catalogue.)

—— _Collection Eugène Piot_, Antiquités. Paris, 1890. (Sale catalogue.)

—— _Collection van Branteghem._ Brussels, 1892, fol., with plates.
    (Sale catalogue.)

—— _Collection d’antiquités du Comte Michael Tyszkiewicz._ Paris, 1898.
    (Sale catalogue.)

    And see Burlington Fine Arts Club, Marseilles Mus.

FURTWAENGLER (A.). _Eros in der Vasenmalerei._ Munich, 1875, 8vo.

—— _Collection Sabouroff._ 2 vols. (the first giving vases). Berlin,
    1883–87, 4to. (Also a German edition; the vases now in Berlin.)

—— _Orpheus, Attische Vase aus Gela_ (in _50tes
    Winckelmannsfestprogr._, 1890).

—— _Neuere Fälschungen von Antiken._ Munich, 1899, 4to.

—— and LOESCHCKE (G.). _Mykenische Thongefässe._ Berlin, 1879, obl. fol.

—— —— _Mykenische Vasen_: Vorhellenische Thongefässe aus dem Gebiete
    des Mittelmeeres. Berlin, 1886, 4to, with atlas in fol.

—— and REICHHOLD (C.). _Die griechische Vasenmalerei_, Auswahl
    hervorragender Vasenbilder. Munich, 1900, etc. Text by A. F. and C.
    R.; plates (separate) by C. R. And see Berlin, Genick.


GARDNER (E. A.). See Cambridge, Naukratis.

GARDNER (P.). See Oxford.

GARGIULO (R.). _Cenni sulla maniera di rinvenire i vasi fittili
    Italo-Greci._ Naples, 1831; 2nd edn., 1843.

—— _Raccolta de Monumenti più interessanti del Real Mus. Borb._ Naples,
    1825–3-. 2 vols. of plates.

GENICK (A.) and FURTWAENGLER (A.). _Griechische Keramik._ 4to. Tafeln
    ausgewählt und aufgenommen von A. G., mit Einleitung und
    Beschreibung von A. F. 2nd edn. Berlin, 1883, 4to.

GERHARD (E.). _Antike Bildwerke._ Munich, 1828–44. Text in 8vo and
    plates in fol.

—— _Berlins antike Bildwerke._ Berlin, 1836, 8vo.

—— _Griechische und etruskische Trinkschalen_ des königl. Museums zu
    Berlin. Berlin, 1840, fol.

—— _Auserlesene griechische Vasenbilder._ 4 vols. Berlin, 1840–58.
    (Gerhard, _A. V._) Re-edited by S. Reinach, _Répertoire_, vol. ii.
    (1900).

—— _Etruskische und campanische Vasenbilder_ des königl. Museums zu
    Berlin. Berlin, 1843, fol.

—— _Apulische Vasenbilder_ des königl. Museums zu Berlin. Berlin, 1845,
    fol.

—— _Trinkschalen und Gefässe_ des königl. Museums zu Berlin und anderer
    Sammlungen. Berlin, 1848–50, fol.

—— _Gesammelte akademische Abhandlungen und kleine Schriften._ 2 vols.
    in 8vo and atlas in 4to. Berlin, 1866–68. (Chiefly papers on
    mythology, illustrated by vases.)

GIRARD (P.). _La Peinture antique._ Paris, 1892. Vases as illustrative
    of Greek painting.

GORI (A. F.). _Museum Etruscum._ 3 vols. Florence, 1737–43, fol.

GSELL (S.). _Fouilles dans la nécropole de Vulci_, exécutées et
    publiées aux frais de Prince Torlonia. Paris, 1891, 4to.


HANCARVILLE (P. F. HUGUES, _pseud._ D’). _Antiquités étrusques,
    grecques, et romaines_, tirées du cabinet de M. Hamilton. 4 vols.
    folio, 1766–67.

HARRISON (JANE E.). _Myths of the Odyssey in art and literature._
    London, 1882, 8vo.

—— _Mythology and Monuments of Ancient Athens_ (with translation from
    Pausanias, by M. de G. Verrall). London, 1890. Introduction
    important for vases relating to Attic cults.

—— _Prolegomena to Greek Religion._ Cambridge, 1903. Numerous vases
    interpreted with reference to mythology and religion.

—— and MACCOLL (D. S.). _Greek Vase-paintings._ London, 1894.

_Harrow School Museum._ Catalogue of the classical antiquities from the
    collection of the late Sir G. Wilkinson, by CECIL TORR. Harrow,
    1887, 8vo.

HARTWIG (P.). _Die griechischen Meisterschalen des strengen
    rothfigurigen Stils._ Stuttgart, 1893, 4to, with atlas in fol.
    Invaluable for a study of cups of R.F. period.

HELBIG (W.). _Das homerische Epos, aus den Denkmälern erlautert._ 2nd
    edn. Leipzig, 1884, 8vo. (Vases used to illustrate civilisation of
    Homeric poems.)

—— _Les vases du Dipylon et les naucraries._ Paris, 1898, 4to.

—— _Eine Heerschau des Peisistratos oder Hippias auf einer
    schwarzfigurigen Schale._ Munich, 1898, 8vo.

—— _Les_ ?ppe?? _Athéniens_. Paris, 1902, 4to. And see Rome.

HERMANN (P.). _Das Gräberfeld von Marion auf Cypern._ Berlin, 1888,
    4to. An account of the finds by O. Richter and others at Poli,
    Cyprus. (_48tes Winckelmannsfestprogr._)

HEYDEMANN (H.). _Iliupersis auf einer Trinkschale des Brygos._ Berlin,
    1866, fol.

—— _Humoristische Vasenbilder aus Unteritalien._ Berlin, 1870. (_30tes
    Winckelmannsfestprogr._)

—— _Griechische Vasenbilder._ Berlin, 1870, fol. (Chiefly vases at
    Athens.)

—— _Nereiden mit den Waffen des Achill._ Halle, 1879, fol.

—— _Satyr und Bakchennamen._ Halle, 1880. (5tes hallische
    Festprogr.). Numerous other monographs, chiefly Hallische or
    Winckelmannsfestprogramme. And see Naples.

HIRSCHFELD (G.). _Athena und Marsyas._ Berlin, 1872.

HOPPIN (J. C.). _Euthymides_; a study in Attic vase-painting. Leipzig,
    1896.

HUDDILSTON (J. H.). _Greek Tragedy in the light of vase-paintings._
    London and New York, 1892.

—— _Lessons from Greek Pottery._ London and New York, 1902. With
    bibliography.


INGHIRAMI (F.). _Monimenti etruschi o di etrusco nome._ Ser. 5. Vasi
    fittili. Fiesole, 1824, 4to.

—— _Galeria Omerica._ 3 vols. Fiesole, 1831–36.

—— _Etrusco Museo Chiusino._ 2 vols. Fiesole, 1832–34, 4to.

—— _Pitture di vasi fittili._ 4 vols. Fiesole, 1833–37.

—— _Pitture di vase etruschi._ 4 vols. Florence, 1852–56. (A second
    edition of the preceding work.)


JAHN (O.). _Telephos und Troilos._ Kiel, 1841, 8vo.

—— _Ueber Darstellungen griechischer Dichter auf Vasenbildern._
    Leipzig, 1861. (From _Abhandl. des sächs. Gesellsch._ viii.)

—— _Archaeologische Aufsätze._ Greifswald, 1845, 8vo.

—— _Archaeologische Beiträge._Berlin, 1847, 8vo.

—— _Beschreibung der Vasensammlung Königs Ludwigs in der Pinakothek zu
    München._ Munich, 1854, 8vo. (_Vasens. zu München._) The
    _Einleitung_ (Introduction) gives a résumé of the whole subject.

—— _Ueber bemalte Vasen mit Goldschmuck._ Leipzig, 1865, 4to.

—— _Die Entführung der Europa_ auf antiken Kunstwerken. Vienna, 1870,
    4to.

JATTA (G.). _Catalogo del Museo Jatta_ (at Ruvo). Naples, 1869, 8vo.


_Karlsruhe. Beschreibung der Vasensammlung der grossherzoglichen
    vereinigte Sammlungen zu Karlsruhe_, by H. WINNEFELD. 1887, 8vo.

KARO (G.). _De arte vascularia antiquissima quaestiones._ Bonn, 1896,
    8vo.

KEKULÉ (R. VON, now KEKULE VON STRADONITZ). See Bonn.

KIRCHHOFF (A.). _Studien zur Geschichte des griechischen Alphabets._
    4th edn. Gütersloh, 1887.

KLEIN (W.). _Euphronios_; eine Studie zur Geschichte der griechischen
    Malerei. 2nd edn. Vienna, 1886, 8vo.

—— _Die griechischen Vasen mit Meistersignaturen._ 2nd edn. Vienna,
    1887, 8vo.

—— _Die griechischen Vasen mit Lieblingsinschriften._ 2nd edn. Vienna,
    1898.

KNAPP (P.). _Nike in der Vasenmalerei._ Tübingen, 1876, 8vo.

    _Kopenhagen. De malede Vaser i Antikkabinettet i Kjöbenhavn_.
    Kopenhagen, 1862. Catalogue of the vases, by S. Birket Smith.
    (Referred to as Kopenhagen, with number of vase.)

KRAMER (G.). _Ueber den Styl und die Herkunft der bemalten griechischen
    Thongefässe._ Berlin, 1837.

KRAUSE (J. H.). _Angeiologie._ Halle, 1854, 8vo. (Study of vase-shapes
    and their names.)

KRETSCHMER (P.). _Die griechischen Vaseninschriften ihrer Sprache nach
    untersucht._ Gütersloh, 1894.


LA BORDE (A. DE). _Collection des vases grecs de M. le Comte de
    Lambert._ 2 vols. Paris, 1813–28, fol. The vases are now at Vienna.
    Re-edited by S. Reinach in _Répertoire_, vol. ii. (1900).

LA CHAUSSE (M. A. de = Caussius). _Romanum Museum._ Rome, 1690; 3rd
    edn., 1746.

LANZI (L.). _Dei vasi antichi dipinti volgarmente chiamati Etruschi._
    Florence, 1806.

LAU (TH.), BRUNN (H.), and KRELL (P.). _Die griechischen Vasen, ihre
    Formen und Decorationssystem._ Plates and text. From originals at
    Munich. Leipzig, 1877. (Brunn-Lau, Gr. Vasen.)

LENORMANT (C.) and DE WITTE (J.). _Élite des monuments
    céramographiques._ 4 vols. Paris, 1837–61, 4to. (_Él. Cér._)

LETRONNE (J. A.). _Observations sur les noms de vases grecs._ Paris,
    1833.

_London._ See British Museum.

LONGPÉRIER (H. A. PRÉVOST DE). _Musée Napoléon III._ Choix de monuments
    antiques ... Texte explicatif par A. de L. Paris, unfinished,
    1868–74, 4to.

_Louvre._ See Paris.

LÜTZOW (C. VON). _Zur Geschichte des Ornaments an den bemalten
    griechischen Thongefässen._ Munich, 1858.

LUYNES (H. D’A. DE). _Description de quelques vases peints_, étrusques,
    italiotes, siciliens et grecs. Paris, 1840, fol. The vases are now
    in the Bibliothèque Nationale. Re-edited by S. Reinach,
    _Répertoire_, ii, (1900).


MACCOLL (D. S.). See Harrison.

MACPHERSON (D.). _Antiquities of Kertch_, and researches in the
    Cimmerian Bosphorus, etc. London, 1857, 4to. (Discoveries in the
    Crimea.)

_Madrid_ (Museo arquelogico nacional). _Catalogo del Museo_, by A. G.
    Gutierrez and J. de D. de la Rada y Delgado. Part i. Madrid, 1883,
    8vo.

_Marseilles._ _Catalogue des antiquités grecques et romaines du Musée_,
    by W. FROEHNER. 1897.

MARTHA (J.). _L'Art Étrusque._ Paris, 1889, 4to.

MASNER (K.). See Vienna.

MAYER (M.). _Die Giganten und Titanen in der antiken Sage und Kunst._
    Berlin, 1886.

_Mélanges Perrot._ Paris, 1902, 4to. (Collected papers in honour of
    Perrot.) (Recueil de mémoires concernant l’archéologie classique,
    la littérature, et l’histoire anciennes, dedié à Georges Perrot.)

MICALI (G.). _Storia degli antichi popoli Italiani._ 3 tom. Firenze,
    1832, 8vo. With atlas entitled _Monumenti per servire alla storia_,
    etc. Fol.

——— _Monumenti inediti a illustrazione della storia degli antichi
    popoli italiani._ Florence, 1844, 8vo, plates in fol. Vases found
    in Etruria. (Micali, _Mon. Ined._)

MILCHHOEFER (A.). _Die Anfänge der Kunst in Griechenland._ Leipzig,
    1883, 8vo.

MILLIET (P.). _Études sur les premières périodes de la céramique
    grecque._ Paris, 1891.

MILLIN (A. L.). _Peintures des vases antiques._ 2 vols. Paris, 1808–10,
    fol. The _Introduction_ of Dubois-Maisonneuve (_q.v._) was
    published uniform with this. Re-edited by S. Reinach in 4to, Paris,
    1891. (Millin-Reinach.)

MILLINGEN (F.). _Ancient Unedited Monuments_ of Grecian Art. 2 vols. in
    one. London, 1822–26. (Millingen, _Anc. Uned. Monum._)

——— _Peintures antiques de vases grecs, tirées de diverses
    collections._ Rome, 1813, fol. Re-edited by S. Reinach in 4to,
    Paris, 1891. (Millingen-Reinach.)

——— _Peintures antiques de vases grecs de la collection de Sir J.
    Coghill._ Rome, 1817, fol. Re-edited by S. Reinach in _Répertoire_,
    ii. (1900).

MORGENTHAU (J. C.). _Ueber den Zusammenhang der Bilder auf griechischen
    Vasen._ I. Die schwarzfigurigen Vasen. Leipzig, 1886. 8vo.

MOSES (H.). _A collection of antique vases, etc._, from various museums
    and collections. London, 1814.

——— _Vases from the collection of Sir Henry Englefield._ London, 1848.

MUELLER (E.). _Drei griechische Vasenbilder._ Zurich, 1887. 4to.

MÜLLER (K. O.). _Denkmäler der Alten Kunst._ 1832–69, obl. fol. 2 vols.
    (2nd re-edited by F. Wiestler).

—— —— Theil ii. 3rd edn., 1877. Text 4to; plates, 1881, obl. fol.

_Munich._ _Beschreibung der Vasensammlung König Ludwigs in der
    Pinakothek_, by O. JAHN. Munich, 1855. With admirable introduction.
    See also the guide (_Führer_) published in 1895. A new catalogue by
    Furtwaengler said to be in progress.

MURRAY (A. S.). _Handbook of Greek Archaeology._ London, 1892. (Chaps.
    i. and ii. deal with vases.) And see British Museum.

_Museo Borbonico._ Naples, 1824–57. 16 vols., 4to. Illustrations of the
    collections in the Naples Museum (Real Museo Borbonico). See also
    Gargiulo.

_Museo Gregoriano._ Museo Etrusci ... in Aedibus Vaticanis ...
    Monumenta. 2 vols. (vases in 2nd). Rome, 1842, fol. (_Mus. Greg._)

MYRES, J. L. See Nicosia.


_Naples._ _Die Vasensammlungen des Museo Nazionale zu Neapel_, by H.
    HEYDEMANN. Berlin, 1872. See also Gargiulo, Museo Borbonico.

_Naukratis, I._ and _II._ Third and Sixth Memoirs of the Egypt
    Exploration Fund, by W. M. Flinders Petrie, E. A. Gardner, etc.
    London, 1886–88. Plates of pottery found at Naukratis, discussed in
    text by C. Smith and E. A. Gardner.

_Nicosia_ (Cyprus Museum). _A Catalogue of the Cyprus Museum_, by J. L.
    MYRES and M. OHNEFALSCH-RICHTER. Oxford, 1899.


OHNEFALSCH-RICHTER (M.). _Kypros, the Bible, and Homer._ 2 vols., text
    and plates. Berlin, 1893. Also a German edition. Useful for
    collected examples of Cypriote pottery and terracottas. See also
    Nicosia.

OVERBECK (J.). _Die Bildwerke zum thebischen und troischen
    Heldenkreis._ 2 vols., text and atlas. Brunswick and Stuttgart,
    1853–57. Lists of vases illustrating Theban and Trojan legends.
    (Overbeck, _Her. Bildw._)

—— _Griechische Kunstmythologie._ Vols. ii.–iv. only published (Zeus,
    Hera, Poseidon, Demeter, Apollo, and myths connected with them).
    Leipzig, 1871–89. With atlas in fol. (Overbeck, _Kunstmythol._)

_Oxford_ (Ashmolean Museum). _Catalogue of the Greek Vases in the
    Ashmolean Museum_, by P. Gardner. Oxford, 1893. With coloured
    plates.


PANOFKA (T.). _Vasi di premio illustrati._ Florence, 1826.

—— _Musée Blacas._ Paris, 1829, fol. Vases mostly in B.M.

—— _Recherches sur les véritables noms des vases grecs._ Paris, 1829.

—— _Antiques du cabinet du comte Pourtalès-Gorgier._ Paris, 1834, 4to.
    (Panofka, _Cab. Pourtalès_.)

—— _Bilder antiken Lebens._ Berlin, 1843, 4to.

—— _Griechinnen und Griechen nach Antiken skizzirt._ Berlin, 1844, 4to.

—— _Der Vasenbilder Panphaios._ Berlin, 1848.

—— _Von den Namen der Vasenbildner in Beziehung zu ihren bildlichen
    Darstellungen._ Berlin, 1849, 4to.

—— _Die griechischen Eigennamen mit_ ?a??? in Zusammenhang mit dem
    Bilderschmuck auf bemalten Gefässen. Berlin, 1850.

    (And many other pamphlets with publication of vases, chiefly from
    the mythological point of view, but now out of date.)

_Paris_ (Louvre). _Catalogue des vases antiques de terre cuite_, by E.
    POTTIER. Paris, 1896, etc. In progress (two volumes issued, dealing
    with earlier fabrics). With accompanying atlas of photographic
    plates (2 vols., down to Euphronios).

_Paris_ (Bibliothèque Nationale). _Catalogue des vases dans le Cabinet
    des Médailles_, by A. DE RIDDER. Paris, 1901–02. 2 vols. With
    plates.

PASSERI (J. B.). _Picturae Etruscorum in Vasculis._ 3 vols. Rome,
    1767–75, fol.

PATRONI (G.). _Ceramica antica nell’ Italia meridionale._ Naples, 1897.
    A useful study of Greek and local fabrics of Southern Italy.

PELLEGRINI (G.). See Bologna.

PERROT (G.) and CHIPIEZ (C.). _Histoire de l’art dans l’antiquité._
    (Text by Perrot, plates by Chipiez.) In progress: 8 vols, published
    in 1882–1904. Vol. iii., Cypriote pottery; vol. vi., Mycenaean;
    vol. vii., Dipylon. (Perrot, _Hist. de l’Art._)

_Petersburg._ _Vasensammlung der kaiserlichen Ermitage_, by L.
    STEPHANI. Petersburg, 1869. 2 vols.

POLLAK (L.). _Zwei Vasen aus der Werkstatt Hierons._ Leipzig, 1900.

POTTIER (E.). _Étude sur les lécythes blancs attiques à représentations
    funéraires._ Paris, 1883, 8vo. (Bibliothèque des Écoles françaises,
    No. 30.)

—— _La peinture industrielle chez les Grecs._ Paris, 1898, 8vo.

—— and REINACH (S.). _La Nécropole de Myrina._ 2 vols. Paris, 1887.

    See also Daremberg, Dumont, Paris.


RAOUL-ROCHETTE. _Monumens inédits d’antiquité figurée._ Paris, 1833,
    fol.

—— _Peintures antiques inédites._ Paris, 1836, 4to.

RAVESTEIN (E. DE M. DE). _Musée de Ravestein_; Catalogue descriptif. 2
    vols. Liège, 1871–72, 8vo.

RAYET (O.) and COLLIGNON (M.). _Histoire de la céramique grecque._
    Paris, 1888. (More or less popular, and becoming out of date; well
    illustrated.) (Rayet and Collignon.)

REINACH (S.). _Chroniques d’Orient._ Paris, 1891–96. 2 vols. Reprinted
    from the _Revue Archéol._ (1883–95). Notes of discoveries, etc.

—— _Répertoire des Vases Peints._ Paris, 1899–1900. 2 vols. An
    invaluable re-editing, with outline reductions of the plates, of
    many publications of vases, with bibliographical notes and
    explanations appended. See Laborde, de Luynes, Tischbein, etc., and
    list of periodicals. (Referred to as _Reinach_, with number of
    volume and page. In Chapters XII.-XV. the references are all to
    this publication in preference to the original works.)

    See also Millin, Millingen, _Ant. du Bosph. Cimm._, and Pottier.

REISCH (E.). See Rome.

RIDDER (A. DE). See Paris.

RIEGL (A.). _Stilfragen._ Grundlegungen zu einer Geschichte der
    Ornamentik. Berlin, 1893, 8vo. A valuable study of early vegetable
    ornament on vases.

ROBERT (C.). _Thanatos._ Berlin, 1879, 4to. (_39tes
    Winckelmannsfestprogr._)

—— _Bild und Lied._ Berlin, 1881, 8vo. On the relation of
    vase-paintings to the Homeric poems.

—— _Archaeologische Märchen_ aus alter und neuer Zeit. Berlin, 1886,
    8vo. Papers on various subjects, more or less controversial.

—— _Homerische Becher._ (_50tes Winckelmannsfestprogr._) Berlin, 1890.

ROBERT (C). _Scenen der Ilias und Aithiopis_ auf einer Vase der
    Sammlung des Grafen M. Tyszkiewicz. Halle, 1891, fol. (_15tes Hall.
    Winckelmannsprogr._)

—— _Die Nekyiades Polygnot._ Halle, 1892. (_16tes Hallisches
    Festprog._; a restoration of the painting on the basis of vases.)

—— _Die Iliupersis des Polygnot._ Halle, 1893. (_17tes Hallisches
    Festprogr._; dealing similarly with that painting.)

—— _Die Marathonschlacht in der Poikile_ und weiteres über Polygnot.
    (_18tes Hallisches Festprogr._) Halle, 1895.

ROBERTS (E. S.). _An Introduction to Greek Epigraphy._ Part i. The
    archaic inscriptions and the Greek alphabet. Cambridge, 1887, 8vo.

ROBINSON (E.). See Boston.

ROEHL (H.). _Inscriptiones Graecae antiquissimae_ praeter Atticas in
    Attica repertas. Berlin, 1882, fol. (Roehl, _I.G.A._)

ROHDEN (H. VON). See Baumeister.

_Rome_ (Vatican, Museo Gregoriano). _Führer durch die öffentlichen
    Sammlungen in Rom_, by W. HELBIG and E. REISCH. 2nd edn., 1899. 2
    vols. In vol. ii. is given a full description of the best vases
    (about 250) in this collection; they are quoted as Helbig 1, 2, 3,
    etc., according to the numbers of the book. See also _Museo
    Gregoriano_.

ROSCHER (W. H.). _Ausführliches Lexikon der griechischen und römischen
    Mythologie._ Leipzig, 1884, etc. In progress (down to P in 1904).
    Many vases published in the later parts.

ROSS (L.). _Reisen auf die griechischen Inseln des ägäischen Meeres._
    Halle, 1840–52, 4 vols., 8vo.

—— _Archaeologische Aufsätze._ 2 vols. Leipzig, 1855–61. With plates in
    fol.

ROULEZ (J.). _Choix de vases peints du Musée d’antiquités de Leyde._
    Gand, 1854. Re-edited by S. Reinach, _Répertoire_, vol. ii., 1900.

_Ruvo_ (Museo Jatta). See Jatta.


SALZMANN (A). _Nécropole de Camiros_. Paris, 1866–75, fol. Plates only.

SCHLIEMANN (H.). See Vol. I. p. 269.

SCHNEIDER (A.). _Der troische Sagenkreis in der älteren griechischen
    Kunst._ Leipzig, 1886.

SCHNEIDER (F. J.). _Die zwölf Kämpfe des Herakles in der älteren
    griechischen Kunst._ Leipzig, 1888.

SCHNEIDER (R.). _Die Geburt der Athena._ Vienna, 1880, 8vo.

SCHÖNE (R.). _Le antichità del Museo Bocchi di Adria._ Rome, 1878, 4to.

SCHREIBER (TH.) and ANDERSON (W. C. F.). _Atlas of Classical
    Antiquities._ London, 1895, obl. 8vo. (Schreiber-Anderson.)

SCHULZ (H. W.). _Die Amazonenvase von Ruvo_, erklärt und in
    Kunsthistorischer Beziehung betrachtet. Leipzig, 1851, fol. See
    Reinach, _Répertoire_, vol. ii.

_Sèvres Museum._ _Description méthodique du Musée Céramique de Sèvres_,
    by A. BRONGNIART and D. RIOCREUX. Paris, 1845. 2 vols., with atlas
    of plates.

SITTL (K.). _Die Phineusschale und ähnliche Vasen mit bemalten
    Flachreliefs._ Würzburg, 1892.

SMITH (A. H.). See British Museum.

SMITH (CECIL). _Catalogue of the Forman Collection of Antiquities_
    (illustrated). London, 1899. And see British Museum.

SMITH (S. B.). See Kopenhagen.

STACKELBERG (O. M. VON). _Die Gräber der Hellenen._ Berlin, 1836, fol.

STEPHANI (L.). See Petersburg and _Compte-Rendu._

_Strena Helbigiana._ (Collected papers in honour of W. Helbig.)
    Leipzig, 1900, 8vo.

STUDNICZKA (F.). _Kyrene, eine altgriechische Göttin._ Leipzig, 1890.


_Tanis II._ Fourth Memoir of the Egypt Exploration Fund (Tell-Nebesheh
    and Defenneh). London, 1887. By W. M. F. PETRIE and F. L. GRIFFITH,
    with notes on the Daphnae pottery by A. S. Murray.

THIERSCH (F.). _Ueber die hellenischen bemalten Vasen_, mit besonderer
    Rücksicht auf die Sammlung des Königs Ludwigs von Bayern. Munich,
    1849. From _Abhandl. d. k. bayer. Akad., Philosoph.-philol.
    Classe_, vol iv.

THIERSCH (H.). _Tyrrhenische Amphoren._ Eine Studie zur Geschichte der
    altattischen Vasenmalerei. Leipzig, 1899.

TISCHBEIN (W.). _Collection of engravings from ancient vases_ (the
    second Hamilton Collection; see Vol. I. p. 17). 4 vols. Naples,
    1791–95, fol. Re-edited by S. Reinach, _Répertoire_, vol. ii.,
    1900. About 100 plates were engraved for a fifth volume, never
    published.

TREU (W.). _Griechische Thongefässe in Statuetten- und Büstenformen._
    Berlin, 1875, 4to. (_35tes Winckelmannsfestprogr._)

TYSZKIEWICZ (COUNT M.). See Froehner.


URLICHS (C. L. VON). _Der Vasenmaler Brygos und die ruland’sche
    Münzsammlung._ Würzburg, 1875, fol.

—— _Beiträge zur Kunstgeschichte._ Leipzig, 1884, 8vo. See also
    Würzburg.

USSING (J.). _De nominibus vasorum graecorum disputatio._ Copenhagen,
    1844.


_Vienna._ _Die Sammlung antiker Vasen und Terracotten im k. k.
    Oesterreichischen Museum für Kunst und Industrie_, by K. MASNER.
    Vienna, 1892. With plates.

VOGEL (K. J.). _Scenen euripideischer Tragödien in griechischen
    Vasengemälden._ Leipzig, 1886.

_Vorlegeblätter für archäologische Übungen._ Vienna, 1869–91, fol.
    Plates without text. Series i.–viii. 1869–75, _ed._ A. Conze
    (chiefly R.F. kylikes, by Euphronios, Hieron, Duris). Series A-E,
    1879–86, _ed._ O. Benndorf (chiefly R.F. kylikes). Third series,
    1888–91 (3 vols.), _ed._ Benndorf and others (chiefly signed B.F.
    vases). (_Wiener Vorl._)


WALLIS (H.). _Pictures from Greek Vases. The White Athenian lekythi._
    London, 1896.

WALTERS (H. B.). See British Museum.

WATZINGER (C). _De vasculis pictis tarentinis capita selecta._
    Darmstadt, 1899, 8vo.

WELCKER (F. G.). _Alte Denkmäler._ 5 vols, and atlas. Göttingen,
    1849–64.

WERNICKE (K.). _Die griechischen Vasen mit Lieblingsnamen._ Berlin,
    1890.

—— and GRAEF (B.). _Denkmäler der antiken Kunst._ Leipzig, 1899, etc.
    In progress. A new edition of Müller and Wieseler’s well-known
    work. Text and atlas.

WESTROPP (H. M.). _Epochs of painted vases, an introduction to their
    study._ London, 1856.

WILISCH (E. G.). _Die altkorinthische Thonindustrie._ Leipzig, 1892.

WINKLER (A.). _De inferorum in vasis Italiae inferioris
    repraesentationibus._ Breslau, 1888, 8vo.

WINNEFELD (H.). See Karlsruhe.

WINTER (F.). _Die jüngeren attischen Vasen_ und ihr Verhaltniss zur
    grossen Kunst. Berlin, 1885.

WITTE (J. J. A. M. DE, BARON). _Description des antiquités et objects
    d’art qui composent le cabinet de feu M. E. Durand._ Paris, 1836,
    8vo.

—— _Description d’une collection de vases peints et bronzes antiques_
    provenant des fouilles de l’Étrurie. Paris, 1837, 8vo. [Another
    edition, 1857.]

—— _Noms des fabricants et dessinateurs de vases peints._ Paris, 1848,
    8vo.

—— _Études sur les vases peints._ Paris, 1865, 8vo. (Extract from the
    _Gazette des Beaux-Arts_.)

—— _Description des collections d’antiquités conservées à l’Hôtel
    Lambert_ (the Czartoryski collection). Paris, 1886, 4to. (_Coll. à
    l’Hôtel Lambert._) See also Lenormant.

_Würzburg._ _Verzeichniss der Antikensammlung der Universität
    Würzburg_, by C. L. VON URLICHS. 1865–72, 8vo.


ZANNONI (A.). _Gli Scavi della Certosa di Bologna._ 2 vols., text and
    plates. Bologna, 1876, fol. (An account of excavations at Bologna;
    many illustrations of tombs and Greek vases.)


                                PART III
                              TERRACOTTAS

_Athens._ See Martha.

_Berlin Museum._ _Ausgewählte griechische Terrakotten_ im Antiquarium
    des königliches Museum zu Berlin, herausgegeben von der
    Generalverwaltung. Berlin, 1903. See also Panofka.

BLÜMNER (H.). _Technologie und Terminologie._ See above, p.xxi. Vol.
    ii. deals with method of working in clay (Thonplastik, p. 113 ff.).

BORRMANN (R.). _Die Keramik in der Baukunst._ Durm’s _Handbuch der
    Architektur_, part i. vol. 4. Stuttgart, 1897. On the use of
    terracotta in classical architecture. See also Dörpfeld.

_British Museum._ _Terracotta Sarcophagi_, by A. S. Murray. London,
    1898. See above, p. xxii.

—— _Catalogue of the Terracottas in the British Museum_, by H. B.
    Walters. London, 1903. See also Combe.

CAMPANA (G. P.). _Antiche opere in plastica._ Rome, 1842–52, fol. Text
    incomplete; plates of architectural terracottas of the Roman period.

COMBE (TAYLOR). _A description of the collection of ancient Terracottas
    in the British Museum._ London, 1810. Describes the Towneley
    figures and mural reliefs.


DAREMBERG (C.), SAGLIO (E.), and POTTIER (E.). _Dictionnaire des
    Antiquités._ See above, p. xxiii. The article _Figlinum_ in vol.
    ii. will be found useful.

DÖRPFELD (W.), GRAEBER (F.), BORRMANN (R.), and SIEBOLD (K.). _Über die
    Verwendung von Terrakotten_ am Geison und Dache in griechischen
    Bauwerke, (_41tes Winckelmannsfestprogr._) Berlin, 1881. (On
    terracotta in architecture.)

FURTWAENGLER (A.). _Collection Sabouroff._ See above, p. xxiv. Vol. ii.
    contains plates of Tanagra figures, with useful text to each.

HEUZEY (L.). _Les Figurines antiques de terre cuite du Musée du
    Louvre._ Paris, 1883, 4to. Plates, with brief text.

—— _Catalogue des figurines antiques de terre cuite du Musée du
    Louvre._ Vol. i. Paris, 1891. Deals with archaic terracottas
    (Rhodes and Cyprus). No more published.

HUISH (M. B.). _Greek Terracotta Statuettes_, their origin, evolution,
    and uses. London, 1900. (The plates include some doubtful
    specimens.)

HUTTON (MISS C.A.). _Greek Terracotta Statuettes._ (_Portfolio_
    monograph, No. 49.) London, 1899. An excellent _résumé_ of the
    subject, with good illustrations.

KEKULÉ (R., now KEKULE VON STRADONITZ). _Griechische Thonfiguren aus
    Tanagra._ Stuttgart, 1878, fol.

—— _Die antiken Terracotten_, im Auftrag des archäologischen Institutes
    des deutschen Reichs, herausgegeben von R. K. Stuttgart, 1880,
    etc., fol. In progress.

    Vol. i. _Terracotten von Pompeii_, by A. VON ROHDEN. 1880. Chiefly
        architectural.

    Vol. ii. _Terracotten von Sicilien_, by R. KEKULÉ. 1884.

    Vol. iii. _Typen der griechischen Terrakotten_, by F. WINTER. 1903.
        In two parts. A _Corpus_ of all known types of terracotta
        statuettes, with numerous illustrations and other useful
        information.

MARTHA (J.). _Catalogue des Figurines en terre cuite du Musée de la
    Société Archéologique d’Athènes._ Paris, 1880, 8vo. (Bibliothèque
    des Écoles françaises, Fasc. 16.)

MINERVINI (G.). _Terre cotte del Museo Campano._ Vol. i. Naples, 1880.
    Illustrations of architectural terracottas.

PANOFKA (T.). _Terracotten des königlichen Museums zu Berlin._ Berlin,
    1842, 4to.

PARIS (P.). _Élatée_, la ville, le Temple d’Athéna Cranaia. Paris,
    1892. (Bibliothèque des Écoles françaises, Fasc. 60.) Contains some
    useful information on the subject.

POTTIER (E.). _Les Statuettes de Terre Cuite dans l’Antiquité._ Paris,
    1890. (Bibliothèque des Merveilles.)

POTTIER (E.) and REINACH (S.). _La Nécropole de Myrina._ 2 vols., text
    and plates. Paris, 1887.

ROHDEN (H. VON). See Kekulé.

SCHÖNE (R.). _Griechische Reliefs aus athenischen Sammlungen_,
    herausgegeben von R. S. Leipzig, 1872, fol. Illustration and
    discussion of the “Melian” reliefs (see pls. 30–34).

WINTER (F.). See Kekulé.


                                PART IV

                             ROMAN POTTERY

ARTIS (E. T.). _The Durobrivae of Antoninus_ identified and
    illustrated. London, 1828, fol. Plates only; for accompanying text
    (by C. Roach-Smith) see _Journ. of Brit. Arch. Assoc._ i. p. 1 ff.
    Deals with pottery and kilns of Castor and neighbourhood.

BLANCHET (A.). _Mélanges d’Archéologie gallo-romaine_, ii. Paris, 1902,
    8vo. (Lists of potteries in Gaul on p. 90 ff.)

BLÜMNER (H.). _Technologie und Terminologie_, etc. See above, p. xxi.

BRONGNIART (A.). _Traité de la Céramique._ See above, p. xxii.

BUCKMAN (J.) and NEWMARCH (C. H.). _Illustrations of the remains of
    Roman Art in Cirencester, the ancient Corinium._ London and
    Cirencester, 1850, 4to. (Now somewhat out of date.)

CAUMONT (A. DE). _Cours d’antiquités monumentales_; histoire de l’art
    dans l’Ouest de la France. 6 vols. Paris and Caen, 1830–41, 8vo,
    with atlas in oblong 4to.

CHOISY (A.). _L'Art de Bâtir chez les Romains._ Paris, 1873, 4to. (For
    the use of bricks and tiles.)

_Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum._ Berlin, 1863, etc., fol. In progress.
    The portions of the published volumes giving the inscriptions on
    vases, tiles, and lamps, under the heading _Instrumentum
    Domesticum_, are invaluable, especially vol. xv. (by H. Dressel)
    relating to Rome. (_C.I.L._)

DÉCHELETTE (J.). _Les Vases céramiques ornés de la Gaule romaine_
    (Narbonnaise, Aquitaine, et Lyonnaise). 2 vols. Paris, 1904, 4to.
    An invaluable survey of the pottery of Central and Southern Gaul,
    with much new material. (Déchelette.)

FABRONI (A.). _Storia degli antichi vasi fittili aretini._ Arezzo,
    1841, 8vo. (On the Arretine wares.)

_Guildhall Museum._ See London.

HÖLDER (O.). _Formen der römische Thongefässe, diesseits und jenseits
    der Alpen._ Stuttgart, 1897, 8vo.

KOENEN (K.). _Gefässkunde der vorrömischen, römischen, und frankischen
    Zeit in den Rheinlanden._ Bonn, 1895, 8vo.

_London_ (Guildhall Museum). _Catalogue of the Collection of London
    Antiquities_ in the Guildhall Museum. London, 1903, 8vo.

—— (Museum of Practical Geology). _Handbook to the collection of
    British Pottery and Porcelain_ in the Museum. London, 1893, 8vo.

MARINI (G.). _Iscrizioni antiche doliari_, edited by G. B. de Rossi and
    H. Dressel. Rome, 1884, 4to.

MARQUARDT (J.). _Handbuch der römischen Alterthümer_ (with T. MOMMSEN).
    Bd. vii., Privatalterthümer. Leipzig, 1879–82, 8vo. See p. 616 ff.
    for Roman pottery.

MAZARD (H. A.). _De la connaissance par les anciens des glaçures
    plombifères._ Paris, 1879, 8vo. (On the enamelled Roman wares
    described in Vol. I. p. 129.)

MIDDLETON (J. H.). _The Remains of Ancient Rome._ 2 vols. London, 1892,
    8vo. (On the use of bricks and tiles at Rome.)

PLICQUE (A. E.). _Étude de Céramique arverno-romaine._ Caen, 1887, 8vo.
    (On the potteries of Lezoux.)

ROACH-SMITH (C). _Collectanea Antiqua_; etchings and notices of ancient
    remains, etc. 7 vols. London, 1848–80, 8vo. Useful for records of
    discoveries of Roman remains in Gaul and Britain.

—— _Illustrations of Roman London._ London, 1859, 4to.

STEINER (J. W. C). _Codex Inscriptionum Romanarum Danubii et Rheni._ 4
    vols. Darmstadt, etc., 1851–61, 8vo. Contains many inscriptions on
    pottery and tiles not as yet published in the C.I.L.

_Victoria County History of England_, ed. by W. PAGE, etc. In progress.
    London, 1900, etc. Articles in the first volume of each separate
    county history, by F. HAVERFIELD, dealing with all known Roman
    remains. Those of Northants and Hampshire are especially useful and
    complete.

WRIGHT (T.). _The Celt, the Roman, and the Saxon._ Fourth edn., 1885.
    Still useful as a summary of Roman Britain, though out of date and
    inaccurate in many particulars.

                               ----------

Reference should also be made to the _Bonner Jahrbücher_ (see above, p.
    xix), especially to the treatise by Dragendorff in vol. xcvi., and
    for German pottery to Von Hefner’s article in _Oberbayrische Archiv
    für vaterlandische Geschichte_, xxii. (1863), p. 1 ff.

For Bibliography of Roman Lamps, see heading to Chapter XX.

                               ----------

                NOTE ON ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THIS WORK

B.F. = Black-figured vases.

R.F. = Red-figured vases.

B.M. = British Museum.

Reinach = Reinach’s _Répertoire des Vases_ (see Bibliography).

In the cases where particular vases are cited, as in Chapters XII.-XV.,
the name of the museum is given with the catalogue number attached, as
B.M. B 1; Louvre G 2; Berlin 2000, etc. The vases in the Vatican Museum
at Rome are quoted as Helbig, 1, 2, 3, etc. (see Bibliography, under
_Rome_).

All other abbreviations will be found in the Bibliography.




                                PART I
                        GREEK POTTERY IN GENERAL




                               CHAPTER I
                             _INTRODUCTORY_

    Importance of study of ancient monuments—Value of pottery as
      evidence of early civilisation—Invention of the art—Use of brick
      in Babylonia—The potter’s wheel—Enamel and glazes—Earliest Greek
      pottery—Use of study of vases—Ethnological, historical,
      mythological, and artistic aspects—Earliest writings on the
      subject—The “Etruscan” theory—History of the study of Greek
      vases—Artistic, epexegetic, and historical methods—The
      vase-collections of Europe and their history—List of existing
      collections.


The present age is above all an age of Discovery. The thirst for
knowledge manifests itself in all directions—theological, scientific,
geographical, historical, and antiquarian. The handiwork of Nature and
of Man alike are called upon to yield up their secrets to satisfy the
universal demand which has arisen from the spread of education and the
ever-increasing desire for culture which is one of the characteristics
of the present day. And though, perhaps, the science of Archaeology
does not command as many adherents as other branches of learning, there
is still a very general desire to enquire into the records of the past,
to learn what we can of the methods of our forefathers, and to trace
the influence of their writings or other evidences of their existence
on succeeding ages.

To many of us what is known as a classical education seems perhaps in
these utilitarian times somewhat antiquated and unnecessary, but at the
same time “the glory that was Greece and the grandeur that was Rome”
have not lost their interest for us, and can awaken responsive chords
in most of our hearts. Nor can we ever be quite forgetful of the debt
that we owe to those nations in almost every branch of human learning
and industry. To take the most patent instance of all, that of our
language, it is not too much to say that nearly every word is either
directly derived from a classical source or can be shown to have
etymological affinities with either of the two ancient tongues. Nor is
it necessary to pursue illustrations further. We need only point to the
evidences of classical influence on modern literature, modern
philosophy, and modern political and social institutions, to indicate
how our civilisation is permeated and saturated with the results of
ancient ideas and thoughts. The man of science has recourse to Greek or
Latin for his nomenclature; the scholar employs Latin as the most
appropriate vehicle for criticism; and modern architecture was for a
long time only a revival (whether successful or not) of the principles
and achievements of the classical genius.

Now, those who would pursue the study of a nation’s history cannot be
content with the mere perusal of such literary records as it may have
left behind. It needs brief consideration to realise that this leaves
us equipped with very little real knowledge of an ancient race,
inasmuch as the range of literature is necessarily limited, and deals
with only a few sides of the national character: its military history,
its political constitution, or its intellectual and philosophical
bent—in short, its external and public life alone. He who would
thoroughly investigate the history of a nation instinctively desires
something more; he will seek to gain a comprehensive acquaintance with
its social life, its religious beliefs, its artistic and intellectual
attainments, and generally to estimate the extent of its culture and
civilisation. But to do this it is necessary not only to be thoroughly
conversant with its literary and historical records, but to turn
attention also to its _monuments_. It need hardly be said that the word
“monument” is here used in the quasi-technical sense current among
archaeologists (witness the German use of the word _Denkmäler_), and
that it must bear here a much wider signification than is generally
accorded to it nowadays. It may, in fact, be applied to any object
which has come down to us as a memorial and evidence of a nation’s
productive capacity or as an illustration of its social or political
life. The student of antiquity can adopt no better motto than the
familiar line of Terence:

               Homo sum; humani nihil a me alienum puto.

For the very humblest product of the human brain or hand, a potsherd or
a few letters scratched on a stone, may throw the most instructive
light on the history of a race.

In no instance is this better seen than in the case of Assyria, where
almost all that we know of that great and wonderful people is derived
from the cuneiform inscriptions scratched on tablets of baked clay. Or,
again, we may cite the stone and bronze implements of the primitive
peoples of Europe as another instance where “the weak and base things
of the world and the things that are despised” have thrown floods of
light on the condition of things in a period about which we should have
been completely in the dark so long as we looked only to literary
records for our information. Nothing is so common that it may be
overlooked, and we may learn more from a humble implement in daily use
than from the finest product of a poetic or artistic intellect, if we
are really desirous of obtaining an intimate acquaintance with the
domestic life of a people.

Among the simplest yet most necessary adjuncts of a developing
civilisation Pottery may be recognised as one of the most universal.
The very earliest and rudest remains of any people generally take the
form of coarse and common pots, in which they cooked their food or
consumed their beverages. And the fact that such vast quantities of
pottery from all ancient civilisations have been preserved to us is due
partly to its comparatively imperishable nature, partly to the absence
of any intrinsic value which saved it from falling a prey to the
ravages of fire, human greed, or other causes which have destroyed more
precious monuments, such as gold ornaments, paintings, and statues of
marble or bronze. Moreover, it is always in the pottery that we
perceive the first indications of whatever artistic instinct a race
possesses, clay being a material so easy to decorate and so readily
lending itself to plastic treatment for the creation of new forms or
development from simple to elaborate shapes.

To trace the history of the art of working in clay, from its rise
amongst the oldest nations of antiquity to the period of the decline of
the Roman Empire, is the object of the present work. The subject
resolves itself into two great divisions, which have engaged the
attention of two distinct classes of enquirers: namely, the technical
or practical part, comprising all the details of material,
manipulation, and processes; and, secondly, the historical portion,
which embraces not only the history of the art itself, and the
application of ancient literature to its elucidation, but also an
account of the light thrown by monuments in clay on the history of
mankind. Such an investigation is therefore neither trifling in
character nor deficient in valuable results.

It is impossible to determine when the manufacture of pottery was
invented. Clay is a material so generally diffused, and its plastic
nature is so easily discovered, that the art of working it does not
exceed the intelligence of the rudest savage. Even the most primitive
graves of Europe and Western Asia contain specimens of pottery, rude
and elementary indeed, but in sufficient quantities to show that it was
at all times reckoned among the indispensable adjuncts of daily life.

It is said that the very earliest specimens of pottery, hand-made and
almost shapeless, have been discovered in the cave-dwellings of
Palaeolithic Man, such as the Höhlefels cave near Ulm, and that of
Nabrigas, near Toulouse; and pottery has also been found in the
“kitchen-middens” of Denmark, which belong to this period. Such relics
are, however, so rude and fragmentary, and so much doubt has been cast
on the circumstances of their discovery, that it is better to be
content with the evidence afforded by the Neolithic Age, of which
perhaps the best authenticated is the predynastic pottery of Egypt.[1]

Abundant specimens of pottery have been found in long barrows in all
parts of Western Europe; these are supposed to be the burial-places of
the early dolichocephalic races, now represented by the Finns and
Lapps, which preceded the Aryan immigration. The chief characteristic
of this pottery is the almost entire absence of ornamentation.
Neolithic man appears to have been far less endowed with the artistic
instinct than his palaeolithic predecessor. Where ornament does occur,
it appears to have a quite fortuitous origin: for instance, a kind of
rope-pattern that appears on the earliest pottery of Britain and
Germany, and also in America, owes its origin to the practice of
moulding the clay in a kind of basket of bark or thread. It is also
possible that cords of some kind were used for carrying the pots; and
this reminds us of another characteristic of the earliest pottery,
which, indeed, lasts down to the Bronze Age—namely, the absence of
handles.

The baking of clay, so as to produce an indestructible and tenacious
substance, was probably also the result of accident rather than design.
This was pointed out as long ago as the middle of the eighteenth
century by M. Goguet. In most countries the condition of the atmosphere
precludes the survival of sun-dried clay for any length of time;
moreover, such a material was more suitable for architecture (as we
shall see later) than for vessels destined to hold liquids. Thus it is
that Egypt, Assyria, and Babylonia alone have transmitted to posterity
the early efforts of workers in sun-dried clay.

To return to the new invention. The savage conceivably found that the
calabash or gourd in which he boiled the water for his simple culinary
needs was liable to be damaged by the action of fire; and it required
no very advanced mental process to smear the exterior of the vessel
with some such substance as clay in order to protect it. As he found
that the surface of the clay was thereby rendered hard and impervious,
his next step would naturally be to dispense with the calabash and
mould the clay into a similar form. These two simple qualities of clay,
its plastic nature and its susceptibility to the action of fire, are
the two elements which form the basis of the whole development of the
potter’s art.

From the necessity for symmetrical buildings arose the invention of the
brick, which must have superseded the rude plastering of the hut with
clay, to protect it against the sun or storm. In the history of the
Semitic nations the brick appears among the earliest inventions, and
its use can be traced with various modifications, from the building of
the Tower of Babel to the present day. It is essential that bricks
should be symmetrical, and their form is generally rectangular. Their
geometrical shape affords us a clue to ancient units of measurement,
and the various inscriptions with which they have been stamped have
elevated them to the dignity of historical monuments. Thus the bricks
of Egypt not only afford testimony, by their composition of straw and
clay, that the writer of Exodus was acquainted with that country, but
also, by the hieroglyphs impressed upon them, transmit the names of a
series of kings, and testify to the existence of edifices, all
knowledge of which, except for these relics, would have utterly
perished. Those of Assyria and Babylon, in addition to the same
information, have, by their cuneiform inscriptions, which mention the
locality of the edifices for which they were made, afforded the means
of tracing the sites of ancient Mesopotamia and Assyria with an
accuracy unattainable by any other means. The Roman bricks have also
borne their testimony to history. A large number of them present a
series of the names of consuls of imperial Rome; while others show that
the proud nobility of the eternal city partly derived their revenues
from the kilns of their Campanian and Sabine estates.

From the next step in the progress of the manufacture—namely, that of
modelling in clay the forms of the physical world—arose the plastic
art. Delicate as is the touch of the finger, which the clay seems to
obey, almost as if comprehending the intention of the potter’s mind,
yet certain forms and ornaments which require a finer point than the
nail gave rise to the use of pieces of horn, wood, and metal, and thus
contributed to the invention of tools. But modelling in clay was soon
superseded by sculpture in stone and metal, and at length only answered
two subordinate ends: that of enabling the sculptor to elaborate his
first conceptions in a material which could be modified at will; and
that of readily producing works of a small and inexpensive form, for
some transitory purpose. The invention of the mould carried this last
application to perfection, and the terracottas of antiquity were as
numerous and as cheap as the plaster casts now sold by itinerants.

The materials used for writing have varied in different ages and
nations. Stone and bronze, linen and papyrus, wax and parchment, have
all been used. But the Assyrians and Babylonians employed for their
public archives, their astronomical computations, their religious
dedications, their historical annals, and even for title-deeds and
bills of exchange, tablets, cylinders, and hexagonal prisms of
terracotta. Some of these cylinders, still extant, contain the history
of the Assyrian monarchs Tiglath-pileser and Assurbanipal, and the
campaign of Sennacherib against the kingdom of Judah; and others,
excavated from the Birs Nimrud, give a detailed account of the
dedication of the great temple by Nebuchadnezzar to the seven planets.
To this indestructible material, and to the happy idea of employing it
in this manner, the present age is indebted for a detailed history of
the Assyrian monarchy; whilst the decades of Livy, the plays of
Menander, and the lays of Anakreon, confided to a more perishable
material, have either wholly or partly disappeared.

The application of clay to the making of vases was made effective by
the invention of the potter’s wheel. Before the introduction of the
wheel only vessels fashioned by the hand, and of rude unsymmetrical
shape, could have been made. But the application of a circular table or
lathe, laid horizontally and revolving on a central pivot, on which the
clay was placed, and to which it adhered, was in its day a truly
wonderful advance. As the wheel spun round, all combinations of oval,
spherical, and cylindrical forms could be produced, and the vases not
only became symmetrical in their proportions, but truthfully reproduced
the potter’s conception. The invention of the wheel has been ascribed
to all the great nations of antiquity. It is represented in full
activity in the Egyptian sculptures; it is mentioned in the Scriptures,
and was certainly in use at an early period in Assyria. The Greeks and
Romans attributed it to a Scythian philosopher, and to the states of
Athens, Corinth, and Sikyon, the first two of which were great rivals
in the ceramic art. But, as will be explained hereafter, it was
introduced at a very early stage in the history of civilisation upon
Greek soil (see p. 206).

Although none of the very ancient kilns have survived the destructive
influence of time, yet among all the great nations baked earthenware is
of the highest antiquity. In Egypt, in the tombs of the first
dynasties, vases and other remains of baked earthenware are abundantly
found; and in Assyria and Babylon even the oldest bricks and tablets
have passed through the furnace. The oldest remains of Hellenic pottery
in all cases owe their preservation to their having been subjected to
the action of fire. To this process, as to the consummation of the art,
the other processes of preparing, levigating, kneading, drying, and
moulding the clay were necessarily ancillary.

The desire of rendering terracotta less porous, and of producing vases
capable of retaining liquids, gave rise to the covering of it with a
vitreous enamel or glaze. The invention of glass was attributed by the
ancients to the Phoenicians; but opaque glass or enamels, as old as the
Eighteenth Dynasty, and enamelled objects as early as the Fourth, have
been found in Egypt. The employment of copper to produce a brilliant
blue-coloured enamel was very early both in Babylonia and Assyria; but
the use of tin for a white enamel, as discovered in the enamelled
bricks and vases of Babylonia and Assyria, anticipated by many
centuries the rediscovery of that process in Europe in the fifteenth
century, and shows the early application of metallic oxides. This
invention apparently remained for many centuries a secret among the
Eastern nations only, enamelled terracotta and glass forming articles
of commercial export from Egypt and Phoenicia to every part of the
Mediterranean. Among the Egyptians and Assyrians enamelling was used
more frequently than glazing; hence they used a kind of faience
consisting of a loose frit or body, to which an enamel adheres after
only a slight fusion. After the fall of the Roman Empire, the art of
enamelling terracotta disappeared except amongst the Arab and Moorish
races, who had retained a traditionary knowledge of the process. The
application of a transparent vitreous coating, or glaze, to the entire
surface, like the varnish of a picture, is also to be referred to a
high antiquity. Originally intended to improve the utility of the vase,
it was used by Greeks and Romans with a keen sense of the decorative
effects that could be derived from its use.

In Greece, although nearly all traces of the Stone Age are wanting, and
little pottery has been found which can be referred to that period,[2]
yet the earliest existing remains of civilisation are, as we shall see
later, in the form of pottery; and Greece is no exception to the
general rule. But the important difference between the pottery of Asia
and Egypt and that of Greece is that only in the latter was there any
development due to artistic feeling. Of the Greek it may be said, as of
the medieval craftsman, _nihil tetigit quod non ornavit_. In the
commonest vessel or implement in every-day use we see almost from the
first the workings of this artistic instinct, tending to exalt any and
every object above the mere level of utilitarianism, and to make it, in
addition to its primary purpose of usefulness, “a thing of beauty and a
joy for ever.” Feeble and rude it may be at first, and hampered by
imperfect knowledge of technique or capacity for expression—but still
the instinct is there.

There is indeed at first but little in Greek pottery to differentiate
it from that of other nations possessing any decorative instincts. As
M. Pottier[3] has pointed out, there is a universal law which manifests
itself in nascent art all over the world: “More than once men have
remarked the extraordinary resemblance which the linear decoration of
Peruvian, Mexican, and Kabyle vases bears to the ornamentation of the
most ancient Greek pottery. There is no possibility of contact between
these different peoples, separated by enormous distances of time and
space. If they have this common resemblance at the outset of their
artistic evolution, it is because all must pass through a certain
phase, resulting in some measure from the structure of the human brain.
Even so at the present day there are savages in Polynesia who, by means
of a point applied to the soft clay, produce patterns exactly similar
to those found on Greek or Cypriote pottery of fifteen or twenty
centuries before our era.” Or to take a later stage of development, the
compositions of vase-paintings of the sixth century B.C. are governed
by the same immutable laws of convention and principles of symmetry as
the carvings of the Middle Ages. Instances might be multiplied _ad
infinitum_; but the principle is universal.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A question that may be well asked by any visitor to a great museum is,
What is the use of the study of Greek vases? The answer is, that no
remains of Greek art have come down to us in such large quantities,
except perhaps coins, and certainly none cover so long a period.
Portraying as they do both the objective and subjective side of Greek
life, they form perhaps the best introduction to the study of Greek
archaeology in general. In no other class of monuments are the daily
life and religious beliefs of the Greeks so vividly presented as in the
painted vases. Their value to the modern student may be treated under
four separate heads: (1) Ethnological; (2) Historical; (3)
Mythological; (4) Artistic.

(1) =Ethnological.=—On this subject we have already touched in this
chapter, pointing out that pottery has an exceptional importance, not
only as one of the most universal and instructive illustrations of the
early developments of a single nation, but for purposes of comparison
of one nation with another. Sculpture, painting, architecture, and
other arts have a more limited range, and tell us nothing of domestic
life or social progress; but the common utensils of daily life, like
flint implements or bronze weapons, are of incalculable value for the
light that they throw on the subject, and the evidence which, in the
absence of historical data, they afford. We have also called attention
to the prevalence of universal laws acting on the development of the
early art of all nations.

Thus in dealing with the early history of Greece, before historical
records are available, we are enabled by the pottery-finds to trace the
extent of the Mycenaean civilisation, from Egypt to the Western
Mediterranean; we may see Homeric customs reflected in the vases of the
Geometrical period from Athens; and in the decorative patterns of the
succeeding period we may see signs of close intercourse with Assyria
and a knowledge of Oriental textile fabrics. The finds in Rhodes,
Cyprus, and the islands off Asia Minor also testify to a continued and
extensive intercourse between the mainland of Greece and the Eastern
Aegean.

(2) =Historical.=—The historical value of Greek vases rests partly on
the external, partly on the internal evidence that they afford. In the
former aspect those of historic times, like those of the primitive age,
confirm, if they do not actually supplement, literary records of Greek
history. Thus the numerous importations of vases from Corinth to Sicily
and Italy in the seventh century B.C. show the maritime importance of
that city and the extent of her commercial relations; while in the
succeeding century the commercial rivalry between her and Athens is
indicated by the appearance of large numbers of Attic fabrics in the
tombs of Italy along with the Corinthian; the final supremacy of Athens
by the gradual disappearance of the Corinthian wares, and the
consequent monopoly enjoyed by the rival state. The fact that after the
middle of the fifth century the red-figured Attic vases are seldom
found in Sicilian or Italian tombs shows clearly the blow dealt at
Athenian commerce by the Peloponnesian War, and the enforced cessation
of exports to the west, owing to the hostility of Sicily and the
crippling of Athenian navies; and the gradual growth of local fabrics
shows that the colonists of Magna Graecia at that time began themselves
to supply local demands. Instances might be multiplied.

But the internal evidence of the vases is of even greater value, not
only for the political, but still more for the social history of
Greece. By the application of painting to vases the Greeks made them
something more than mere articles of commercial value or daily use.
Besides the light they throw on the Greek schools of painting, they
have become an inexhaustible source for illustrating the manners,
customs, and literature of Greece. A Greek vase-painting—to quote M.
Pottier— is not only a work of art, but also an historical document.
Even when all artistic qualities are lacking, and the vase at first
sight is liable to be regarded as a worthless and uninteresting
production, a closer inspection will often reveal some small point
which throws light on a question of mythology, or of costume or armour.
Or, again, an inscription painted or even scratched on a vase may be of
surpassing philological or palaeographical importance. For instance,
the earliest inscription known in the Attic alphabet is a _graffito_ on
a vase of the seventh century B.C. (see Chapter XVII.), which of itself
would command no consideration; but this inscription is valuable not
only as evidence for early forms of lettering, but from its
subject-matter. It is true that it need not necessarily be contemporary
with the vase itself, as it may have been scratched in after it was
made, but this cannot detract from its importance or affect its
chronological value.

Or, again, a fragment of a painted vase found at Athens bears the name
of Xanthippos rudely scratched upon it; on the foot of another is that
of Megakles (see below, p. 103). Both of these are undoubted instances
of ?st?a?a, which were used for the banishment of these historical
personages. They therefore provide a striking illustration of the
institution of Ostracism, and bear out what we have said as to the
importance of archaeological discoveries for the study of History.
Historical or quasi-historical subjects are sometimes actually depicted
on the vases, but this question must be reserved for fuller treatment
in Part III., which deals with the subjects on vases in detail. In that
section of the work we shall also deal with the relations of
vase-paintings to ancient literature; and in the list of subjects taken
from daily life (Chapter XV.) it will be seen what ample information is
afforded on such points as the vocations and pastimes of men, the life
of women, war and athletics, sport and education.

(3) =Mythological.=—On this head reference must again be made to the
chapters on Subjects, as affording ample evidence of the importance of
the vases not only for the elucidation of Greek mythology and legend,
but also for religious cults and beliefs. One other point, however, is
worth noting here. Our knowledge of Greek mythology, if only derived
from literary records, rests largely on the compilations of Roman or
late writers, such as Ovid, Hyginus, and Apollodoros. It has been aptly
pointed out by a recent writer[4] that in these authors we have
mythology in a crystallised form, modified and systematised, and
perhaps confused with Latin elements, and that our popular modern
notions are mainly derived from these sources as they have been
filtered down to us through the medium of Lemprière’s Dictionary and
similar works. But vase-paintings are more or less original and
contemporary documents. Granted that it is possible to run to the
opposite extreme and accept art traditions to the utter neglect of the
literary tradition as derived from Homer and the Tragedians, the fact
still remains that for _suggestions_, and for raising problems that
could never have arisen through a literary medium, the evidence of
vases is of inestimable value.

In regard to Greek religious beliefs, it should be borne in mind that
with the Greeks art was the language by which they expressed their
ideas of the gods. It was thus largely due to their religion that they
attained supremacy in the plastic art, and their absolute freedom of
treatment of their religious beliefs almost eliminated the hieratic and
conventional character of Oriental art from their own, with its
infinite variety of conceptions. The vase-paintings, almost more than
any other class of monuments, reveal the universal religious sentiment
which pervaded their life—the de?s?da?µ???a which prevailed even in
Romanised Athens. Thus the vases constitute a pictorial commentary on
all aspects of Greek life and thought.[5]

(4) =Artistic.=—(_a_) _Form._ In the grace of their artistic forms the
Greeks have excelled all nations, either past or present. The beauty
and simplicity of the shapes of their vases have caused them to be
taken as models; but as every civilised people has received from other
sources forms sanctioned by time, and as many of the Greek forms cannot
be adapted to the requirements of modern use, they have not been
extensively imitated. Yet to every eye familiar with works of art of
the higher order their beauty is fully apparent.

(_b_) _Decoration._ It is at first difficult to realise how little we
actually know of Greek painting. Our modern museums are so full of
specimens of Greek sculpture, either originals or ancient copies of
masterpieces, that we feel it possible to obtain an adequate idea of
the genius of Pheidias or Praxiteles at first-hand, so to speak. But
ancient literature clearly shows that painting was held by the Greeks
in equally high estimation with sculpture, if not even higher. Consult
the writings of the elder Pliny on ancient art. A considerable space is
there devoted to the account of the great painters Zeuxis, Apelles, and
Parrhasios, while Pheidias is barely mentioned, and the account of
Praxiteles’ works is far from complete. Yet we look in vain through
most modern collections for any specimen of Greek painting on fresco or
panel.

This is, of course, due to the perishable character of pictures and the
destruction of the buildings on the walls of which the great frescoes
were preserved. But the fact remains that we have to look in other
directions for the evidence we require to find. We have here and there
a painted Greek tombstone, a Pompeian fresco, or the decoration of an
Etruscan sepulchre to give us a hint; but while the first-named are far
too inconsiderable in number to give us any idea of the art of their
time, the two latter are merely products of an imitative art, giving
but a faint echo of the originals.

Now, in the vases we have, as noted in regard to mythology,
contemporary evidence. It must never be forgotten that vase-painting is
essentially a decorative art; but, as we shall see later in tracing its
historical development, there is always a tendency to ignore the
essential subserviency of design to use, and to give the decoration a
more pictorial character. Many of the late vases are, in fact, pictures
on terracotta. Again, there is a class of fifth-century vases with
polychrome paintings on white ground which actually recall the method
we know to have been employed by the great master of that century,
Polygnotos. And with regard to the late vases we shall hope to show in
a future chapter that, like the Pompeian paintings, they often reflect
the spirit, if not the exact likeness, of some well-known painting of
which we have record.

Many instances might be given of vase-paintings which reflect, or
assist our knowledge of, the products of the higher arts. Even as early
as the end of the sixth century the group of the Tyrant-slayers, the
creation of Antenor and of Kritios and Nesiotes, is found repeated on a
black-figured vase[6]; and the early _poros_ pediments from the
Athenian Acropolis find an interesting parallel in an early Attic vase
of about the same date.[7] So again in Ionia, the style of the
sculptures of the archaic temple at Ephesos finds its reflection in
some of the local sixth-century vase-fabrics.[8] Coming to the fifth
century, the heads in Euphronios’ paintings may be compared with some
of the Attic heads in marble, like that of the ephebos from the
Acropolis.[9] Combats of Greeks with Amazons and Centaurs on later R.F.
vases often seem to suggest a comparison with the friezes of Phigaleia
and Olympia; a figure from the balustrade of the Nike temple is almost
reproduced on a R.F. vase,[10] and the riding youths of the Parthenon
frieze on some of the white Athenian lekythi; and the Kertch vase with
the contest of Athena and Poseidon (Plate L.) is of special interest as
an almost contemporary reproduction of the Parthenon west pediment. In
painting, again, the later R.F. vases in many instances reflect what we
know of the style and composition of Polygnotos’ paintings, and there
are many instances on the vases of the subjects treated by him and
Mikon.[11]

It is not necessary here to say more of the importance of a study of
Greek vases on the several lines that we have pointed out. It is
sufficient to say that specialists in all these branches of Archaeology
instinctively turn to vases for the main source of their information.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The earliest date at which public attention was directed to the painted
vases was the end of the seventeenth century. In those days, it need
hardly be said, systematic excavation was a thing quite unknown, while
archaeology as a science was non-existent. Beyond a few sculptures
which had been handed down at Rome or elsewhere through many
vicissitudes, cabinets of gems which had been preserved by cardinals
and other dignitaries who employed them for signet-rings, chiefly for
ecclesiastical purposes, and some collections of coins of the
Renaissance period, there were no specimens of ancient art preserved.
During the seventeenth century, however, the fashion arose of making
voyages to Italy or Greece, and bringing back any spoils that might
attract the notice of the traveller. In this way the collection of
Arundel Marbles at Oxford was made, and the nucleus of many of the
famous private collections of England formed. But the painted vases,
which for the most part lay buried in tombs, escaped notice almost
entirely—and, perhaps even where specimens were preserved, they
attracted little notice—until with Winckelmann arose a gradual
hankering after the possession of artistic treasures and the formation
of collections of antiques.

The earliest allusion to be found to painted vases is in the works of
La Chausse (Caussius),[12] and in the _Thesaurus_ of Graevius,[13]
while the oldest existing catalogue is that of the collection of the
Elector of Brandenburg, compiled by L. Beger in 1696–1701.[14] Some few
are illustrated in these works, while others were given later by
Montfaucon,[15] Dempster,[16] Gori,[17] and Caylus.[18] Winckelmann
published several vases in his _Histoire de l’Art_ (1764) and
_Monumenti Antichi_ (1769), and the industrious Passeri in 1767–75
published, besides a supplement to Dempster, three volumes containing
coloured engravings of vases in various collections.

Sir William Hamilton, who was for some time English Ambassador at
Naples, formed there a considerable collection of Greek and Roman
antiquities, mostly painted vases, which had been discovered in various
tombs in Southern Italy and Etruria. All these he brought with him to
England and sold to the newly instituted British Museum in 1767. A
Frenchman named Hugues or D'Hancarville compiled a magnificent work in
four volumes[19] illustrating the vases in this collection, with
elaborate diagrams of the shapes; but the representations of the
subjects are often marred by the imaginary ornamental borders in which
they are framed, while the whole work, like others of the same period,
is marked by a tendency to ignore all but the artistic interest, and
instead of an accurate reproduction to aim merely at giving a pretty
picture.

A second collection of vases belonging to Hamilton was mostly lost at
sea, but a record of it has been preserved in Tischbein’s work, _Vases
d’Hamilton_[20] in four volumes, which is more accurate and useful than
that of D'Hancarville. It is believed that many of these vases are now
in the Hope collection at Deepdene, which is unfortunately inaccessible
to archaeologists.

The Hamilton collection formed, as we have said, the nucleus of the
magnificent array of vases in the British Museum. Most of them, it is
true, belong to the later period or decadence of vase-painting, and
were not only found, but had also been manufactured, in Italy. Although
the time for a scientific study and classification was not yet to be
for some sixty years, the interest in the subject was decidedly on the
increase, and many English noblemen and gentlemen were forming
collections, as well as such foreigners as the Duc de Blacas, the Duc
de Luynes, and M. Millin. It became the fashion to produce large folio
works embodying the contents of these collections in series of coloured
illustrations, and thus we have, besides those already mentioned, the
imposing publications of Millin,[21] Millingen[22], Laborde[23], and
others. On the same lines, but mostly of later date, are the
publications of De Rossi[24], Christie[25], Moses[26], Inghirami[27],
Lanzi[28], Böttiger[29], Micali[30], Raoul-Rochette[31],
Stackelberg[32], and the Duc de Luynes[33], who published either their
own vases, as De Luynes, or some well-known collection like that of the
Duc de Blacas, or some particular class of vases: _e.g._ Micali, those
found in Etruria; Raoul-Rochette and Inghirami, those illustrating
Homer; and Stackelberg, those found in tombs in Greece Proper. Few of
these, it will be seen, were published in England, where neither public
patronage nor private enterprise were found prepared to rival the
achievements of the Continent.

In most of these works the vases are styled “Etruscan” as a matter of
course. Even nowadays it is a very common experience to hear vases
spoken of as “Etruscan” or even as “Etruscan urns,” as if every vase
was used as a receptacle for the ashes of the dead. This error has
lasted, with all the perseverance of a popular fallacy, for over a
century, and cannot now be too strongly denounced. But at the beginning
of the last century the Etruscan origin of painted vases was most
strongly maintained by erudite scholars, chiefly Italians who desired
to champion the credit of their own country, and the controversy raged
with varying force till Greece was able to substantiate her own case by
the numbers of vases that came forth from her tombs to proclaim their
Hellenic origin.

The “Etruscan” theory was first promulgated by Montfaucon, Gori,
Caylus, and Passeri, between 1719 and 1752; their arguments being based
on the plausible ground that up till that time the vases had been found
almost exclusively in Etruria. So the term “Etruscan vase” passed into
the languages of Europe, and has survived in spite of a century of
refutation. But in 1763 Winckelmann, the father of scientific
archaeology, conceived the idea that the spirit and character of the
vase-paintings were wholly Greek; and he proposed to call them
Italo-Greek or Graeco-Sicilian, indicating Magna Graecia as the true
place of their manufacture. This was a step in the right direction, and
he was supported later by Lanzi, Millin, Millingen, and others
(1791–1813). A further attempt was made to define the particular places
of their fabric, and Nola, Locri, and Agrigentum were suggested as the
most important centres. Meanwhile, the discoveries of vases in Attica,
at Corinth, and elsewhere in Greece, and subsequently the publication
of Stackelberg’s work, helped to confirm the position of Winckelmann’s
followers.

In 1828 came what M. Pottier terms “an objectionable revival of
Etruscomania,” with the extensive and marvellously fruitful excavations
at Vulci under the direction of the Prince of Canino, Lucien Bonaparte,
on whose estates most of the tombs were found. Several thousand vases
were the yield of this site, mostly of the best periods of Greek art.
This was a great epoch in the history of the study of Greek vases. A
flood of fresh light was thrown on the subject by the mass of new
material, and a whole new literature arose in consequence. Hitherto
vases of the archaic and fine periods had only been known in isolated
instances, and the bulk of the existing collections was formed of the
florid vases of the Decadence; but now it became possible to fill up
the gaps and trace the whole development of the art from the simplest
specimens with decorative patterns or figures of animals down to the
very last stages of painting.

These discoveries prompted Prince Lucien Bonaparte to revive the theory
of Etruscan origin, in which he was supported by D'Amatis and De Fea.
It is probable that all three were animated more by patriotic motives
than by intellectual conviction. At any rate their arguments appealed
but little to scholars, although not a few inclined to take a middle
course, and maintained that there existed, not only in Etruria but also
in Southern Italy, various local centres of manufacture under Greek
superintendence and in close connection with Athens and her influences.
These ideas were upheld by Gerhard, Welcker, the Duc de Luynes, and Ch.
Lenormant. But the preponderating arguments were to be found on the
other side, from Kramer (1837), who attributed all vases but those of
the Decadence to an Attic origin, O. Müller, who limited this to the
finer examples from Vulci, and Raoul-Rochette, who pinned his faith to
Sicily, to Otto Jahn[34], who may be said to have founded the modern
comparative study of Greek ceramics on its present basis (1854).

Jahn pronounced decisively for the Greek origin of all but the later
fabrics, and his principles have been adopted by all succeeding
archaeologists, with the exception of Brunn, and one or two of the
latter’s disciples, who have swung back to the Italian theory in some
respects. Up to his time all had been in chaos, and each writer worked
on his own particular line without regard to others, both as regards
the origin of the vases and the subjects depicted thereon; but Jahn, in
his epoch-making catalogue of the vases at Munich, was the first to
make a serious and scientific attempt to reduce the chaos to order, not
only by adopting a rational system of interpretation, but by
systematising and reducing to one common denominator all previous
contributions to knowledge.

We may say that the study of Greek vases has passed through three main
stages: (1) Artistic; (2) Epexegetic; (3) Historical.

(1) =Artistic= (1690—1770).—In the first stage, as we have seen, the
artistic merit of the vases and the aim of producing a pretty picture
were alone regarded. Hence, too, arose the fashion of making copies of
Greek vases, and many specimens were produced by Wedgwood[35], bearing,
however, no more than a superficial likeness to the originals.

(2) =Epexegetic= (1770—1854).—In the second stage it seems to have been
suddenly discovered that the figures on the vases were not mere
meaningless groups, like the Watteau shepherds and shepherdesses on
Dresden china, and many strange theories were at first promulgated as
to the purposes for which the vases were made and the subjects thereon
depicted. Three main lines of interpretation seem to have been adopted
by the writers of this period:—

(_a_) Passeri, Millin, Lanzi, and Visconti supposed that allusions were
made to the life of the deceased person in whose tomb they were found;
allegorical representations were given of his childish games, his
youthful pastimes, or the religious and social ceremonies in which he
took part.

(_b_) Italynski, in his preface to Tischbein’s work, enunciates the
strange notion that they allude to events of Greek and Roman history:
for instance, three draped men represent the three chief archons of
Athens, or three women conversing, Veturia, the mother of Coriolanus,
with her daughter and daughter-in-law, considering whether she should
appear as a suppliant before her son. The utterly fantastic and
unscientific nature of these explanations was self-evident; the writers
of the first group at any rate had a sounder basis for their theories,
and on the analogy of the sculptured Greek tombstones might well have
been near the truth.

(_c_) Another theory, which attained great popularity, and was even
adhered to partially for some years afterwards by Panofka, Gerhard, and
Lenormant, was that the subjects bore allusion to the Mysteries, more
particularly the Eleusinian. The vases were regarded as presents given
to the initiated, and the reason why their interpretation was so
difficult was that they related to the secrets unfolded in those
ceremonies. Many attempts were made to unlock those secrets and to show
the mystic moral purport of the pictures; but all is the merest
guesswork. The height of fantastic explanation is perhaps reached by
Christie, whose work is quite worth perusal as a literary curiosity.
Panofka, on the other hand, turned his attention to the inscriptions on
the vases,[36] and discerned a symbolical meaning in these, reading
into the names of artists rebuses on the subjects over which they were
inscribed, _e.g._ Douris is indicated by Athena with a spear (d???) or
Hermaios by a figure of Hermes.

(3) =Historical.=—The historical or scientific method of studying Greek
vases consists mainly in classifying them according to different
periods, and within that period to different schools. To these main
considerations the artistic merits of the vases and the explanation of
the subjects are subordinated. The reason for this is obvious. The
artistic and mythological interest of the vases is soon exhausted, and
receives no new impetus from new discoveries. Now, with the comparative
study of vases this is not the case. Any day may bring forth a new
discovery which will completely revolutionise all preconceived
theories; hence there is the constant necessity for being “up-to-date,”
and for the adjustment of old beliefs to new.

But the historical method is not entirely of modern growth. As long ago
as 1767 the first attempt was made by D'Hancarville[37] to classify
vases according to their age. Taking such scanty data as were
available, he divided Italian vases into five classes, ranging from
“some centuries before the foundation of Rome” down to the reigns of
Trajan, the Antonines, and Septimius Severus, which “announc’d the
total decadency of the Art.” The earlier vases he sought to fix more
precisely by reference to the history of painting as told by Pliny.

The Duc de Luynes, writing in 1832,[38] hesitates to define the exact
age of the various styles, though he arranges them generally in six
classes, ranging from the “Doric” or “Phoenician” vases down to
barbaric imitations by the natives of Italy. According to him the
red-figured vases lasted from the time of Perikles down to that of
Pyrrhos. Millingen was content with three periods only, his
division[39] being: (1) ancient style, 700–450 B.C.; (2) fine style,
450–228 B.C.; (3) late style, 228 to Social War. Kramer distinguishes
five epochs: (A) Egyptian style, 580–500 B.C.; (B) older style, 500–460
B.C.; (C) severe style, 460—420 B.C.; (D) fine style, 420–380 B.C.; (E)
rich style, 380–200 B.C.[40] Gerhard[41] surmised that the earliest
vases might date from the ninth or tenth century B.C., the fine style
extending over the fifth and fourth, while the decadence culminated in
the second, and in the first century fictile vases were entirely
supplanted by those of metal.

De Witte made a more detailed classification, extending to nine groups,
and based rather on technical differences, as several of the groups are
contemporaneous; but his classification is essentially a practical one,
and may be regarded as forming a sound basis for all succeeding
catalogues and treatises, as also for the arrangement of museums.

Jahn in his Introduction is content with four main headings, which for
a general classification of a large collection is convenient enough,
and has, in fact, been adopted in the Vase Rooms of the British Museum.
Under this system the four divisions are: (1) Primitive; (2)
Black-figured; (3) Red-figured; (4) Vases of the Decadence. In the
Louvre, on the other hand, the arrangement is mainly geographical,
according to the sites from which the vases have come.

It is recognised by modern archaeologists,[42] working on the lines
laid down by Jahn in the three main divisions of his Introduction, that
in dating and classifying a vase or series of vases three points must
be taken into consideration: (1) circumstances of discovery; (2)
technique and style; (3) inscriptions (when present). The various
questions with which the modern study of vase-paintings has mainly to
deal will be fully investigated in subsequent chapters, and it is not
necessary to say more on this head. But we trust that sufficient
attention has been drawn to the many-sided interests presented by—it is
not necessary to say a collection of vases, but—a single vase[43].

It may be worth while here to turn aside for a moment and study the
rise and growth of the various great vase-collections of Europe. We may
with pardonable pride regard the British Museum as standing at the head
of these collections, possessing as it does the most representative
collection of any, if not the largest. Hardly any known fabric is
unrepresented, nor the work of any known artist; though here and there
another museum may have the advantage—as, for instance, the Louvre in
early black-figured fabrics, Naples in vases of Southern Italy
(especially the large specimens), or Athens in various fabrics peculiar
to Greece, such as the early vases of Thera and Melos, or the
marvellous specimens of “transitional” handiwork found on the Acropolis
of Athens.

The nucleus of the British Museum collection was, as has been
indicated, formed by the vases obtained from Sir W. Hamilton in 1767,
supplemented by those of Towneley and Payne Knight (1805–24): these are
nearly all vases of the late period from Southern Italy. Between the
years 1837 and 1845 a large quantity of fine black-figured and
red-figured vases was acquired from the Canino collection, having been
found on that estate at Vulci, and in 1836 acquisitions from M.
Durand’s sale had helped to swell the number of vases representing that
site, including some very fine examples. In 1842 came the Burgon
collection, mostly of small vases from Athens and the Greek islands; in
1856 the bequest by Sir William Temple of his collection, formed at
Naples, added greatly to the value of the collection of later vases. In
1860–64 large numbers of vases of all periods from 700 B.C. to 400 B.C.
were excavated by Salzmann and Biliotti at Kameiros in Rhodes; and from
Ialysos in the same island came a number of Mycenaean vases by the
generosity of Prof. Ruskin in 1870. Meanwhile, the Blacas collection,
purchased in 1867, had added a large number, chiefly of red-figured and
Italian vases, and in 1873 many more fine specimens from Capua, Nola,
and elsewhere were acquired from M. Castellani. Of late years the chief
additions have been from Cyprus, beginning with a few vases from
Cesnola in 1876 down to the Turner Bequest excavations in 1894–96, and
from the Egypt Exploration Fund’s excavations at Naukratis and Daphnae
(1884–86). Other acquisitions have been mostly in the form of isolated
purchases, especially of the white lekythi and similar classes; some
have come from important collections, such as those of Forman,
Tyszkiewicz, and Van Branteghem.

In 1870, when the old Catalogue was completed, the collection must have
numbered over 2,000 painted vases, besides 1,000 undecorated; at the
present day the total cannot be computed at less than 5,000, of which
about 4,000 may be described as painted vases.

The Louvre collection in Paris[44] started life about a century ago
under the first Napoleon, who established a ceramic section about 1797.
Other vases were added from the Vatican and Naples; and meanwhile the
Royal collection went to form the present Cabinet of Antiquities in the
Bibliothèque Nationale. In 1818 the very limited collection was
augmented by 564 vases from M. Tochon, and in 1825 came a magnificent
acquisition of about 2,000 vases (mostly painted) from M. Durand. From
this time till 1863 the growth was very slow, and the Louvre does not
seem to have profited like other museums by the excavations at Vulci.
In the latter year, however, another splendid collection of 2,000
painted and 1,400 unpainted vases was acquired from Count Campana,
which necessitated the building of new galleries. The early B.F.
fabrics, in which the Louvre is so pre-eminently rich, were all in this
collection. During the last thirty years the only acquisitions of
importance have been representative specimens from Greece and Cyprus;
but the total number is now reckoned at 6,000.

The growth of the Berlin collection has been much more slow and
consistent.[45] Its nucleus was derived from the collection of the
Elector of Brandenburg described by Beger in 1701. Up to 1830 most of
the vases acquired were from Southern Italy and Campania, including
1,348 from the Koller collection in 1828. In 1831, 442 vases and 179
specimens of Etruscan plain ware were acquired from the Dorow
collection, and from 1833 to 1867 the activity of Gerhard procured fine
specimens from time to time, while 174 were bequeathed by him at his
death. When Levezow’s Catalogue was published in 1834, it included
1,579 specimens; the next one by Furtwaengler in 1885 describes more
than 4,000. Of late years many valuable specimens have been derived
from various parts of Greece.

These three may be regarded as the typical representative collections
of Europe; those of Athens, Munich, Naples, and Petersburg are all of
great merit and value, but chiefly strong in one particular
department—Athens in early vases and Attic lekythi, Petersburg in late
red-figured vases, and Naples in the fabrics of Southern Italy. Many of
the finest specimens, however, are to be found in the smaller
collections in the Paris Bibliothèque, at Florence, Vienna, Madrid, and
in Rome. Of late years Europe has found a formidable rival in America,
especially in the Museum of Fine Arts at Boston, which, backed by
almost inexhaustible private benefactions, is gradually acquiring a
large proportion of the signed vases and other _chefs-d’œuvre_ which
from time to time find their way into the market. The Metropolitan
Museum at New York, on the other hand, rests its claim to distinction
on the possession of General Cesnola’s enormous collections of Cypriote
pottery of all periods.

The gradual centralising of vases into public museums is a noteworthy
feature at the present day. The private collections formed by so many
amateurs at the beginning of the century have nearly all been long
since dispersed and incorporated with the various national
collections[46]; and those formed more recently are rapidly sharing the
same fate. Hardly a year passes now without seeing the dispersion of
some notable collection like those of M. Sabouroff, M. van Branteghem,
Colonel Brown (Forman collection), or M. Bourguignon; and almost the
only important one that still remains intact is that of Sig. Jatta at
Ruvo (consisting almost entirely of South Italian vases). Now that the
days are past when it was the custom for rich collectors to publish
magnificently illustrated atlases of their possessions, this tendency
to centralisation can only be welcomed both by artists and students.
For the latter now it only remains to be desired that a scientific and
well-illustrated catalogue of every public museum should be available.

We append here a list of the principal museums and collections in
Europe, which may form a supplement to that given by Jahn in 1854. The
more important ones are printed in heavier type.

  I. GREAT BRITAIN.

    1. =London. British Museum= (see p. 24). Catalogue by C. Smith and
              Walters.

          South Kensington Museum (a few isolated specimens; also some
              from the Museum of Practical Geology Jermyn Street).

          Soane Museum (the Cawdor Vase).

    2. =Oxford. Ashmolean Museum.= Catalogue by P. Gardner (1893).

    3.= Cambridge. Fitzwilliam Museum.= Catalogue by E. A. Gardner
              (1896).

    4. Deepdene (Dorking). Hope Collection. Inaccessible to students.
              Consists entirely of late vases from Southern Italy.

    5. Numerous private collections, among the more important being—

                Richmond. The late Sir F. Cook.

                Castle Ashby. Marquis of Northampton.

    6. Harrow School Museum (a fine “Theseus” Kylix and Krater with
              Centaurs). Catalogue by C. Torr (1887).

    7. Edinburgh.

  II. FRANCE.

    1. =Paris. The Louvre= (see p. 25). Catalogue by Pottier (in
              progress).

          =Bibliothèque Nationale.= Catalogue by A. de Ridder (1902).

          Dzialynski Collection. See De Witte, _Coll. à l’Hôtel
              Lambert_.

    2. Marseilles Museum. Catalogue by Froehner (1897).

    3. Rouen Museum.

    4. Boulogne Museum.

    5. Compiègne Museum.

    6. Sèvres Museum.

  III. BELGIUM AND HOLLAND.

    1. Brussels.[47] See Cat. of Musée de Ravestein. Somzée Collection
              (now dispersed).

    2. Amsterdam. Six Collection.

    3. Leyden Museum. See Roulez, _Vases de Leyde_.

  IV. GERMANY.

    1. =Berlin. Antiquarium= (see p. 25). Catalogue by Furtwaengler
              (1885).

    2. Altenburg.

    3. Bonn.

    4. Breslau.

    5. Brunswick.

    6. Dresden.

    7. Frankfurt. Museum Städel.

    8. Gotha.

    9. Heidelberg.

    10. =Karlsruhe.= Catalogue by Winnefeld (1887).

    11. Leipzig.

    12. =Munich.= Catalogue by Jahn (1854).

    13. Schwerin.

    14. =Würzburg.= Antikenkabinet. Coll. Bankó.

  V. DENMARK AND SWEDEN.

    1. Kopenhagen. Catalogue by Smith (1862).

    2. Stockholm.

  VI. RUSSIA.

    1. =Petersburg. Hermitage.= Catalogue by Stephani (1869).

              Stroganoff Coll.

              Pisareff Coll.

    2. Dorpat (University).

  VII. AUSTRIA.

    1. =Vienna. Oesterreichisches Museum.= Catalogue by Masner (1891).
              K. K. Kabinet. University.

    2. Cracow. Czartoryski Coll.

    3. Prague. Pollak Coll.

    4. Trieste. Museum.

  VIII. SWITZERLAND.

      1. Berne  }
      2. Geneva } All unimportant for Greek Vases.
      3. Zürich.}

  IX. SPAIN.

    Madrid.

  X. ITALY AND SICILY.

    1. Acerra. Spinelli Coll.

    2. Adria. Museo Bocchi. Publication by Schöne.

    3. Arezzo. Chiefly Roman Arretine ware.

    4. =Bologna. Museo Civico.= Catalogue by Pellegrini (1900).
              Università.

    5. Capua. Campana Coll.

    6. Cervetri. Ruspoli Coll.

    7. Chiusi. Museum. Casucchini Coll. (but see p. 73).

    8. Corneto. Museum. Bruschi Coll.

    9. Florence. Museum.

    10. =Naples. Museo Nazionale.= Catalogue by Heydemann (1872).

    11. Orvieto. Museum. Faina Coll.

    12. Palermo. Museum.

    13. Parma.

    14. Perugia. Museum.

    15. =Ruvo. Jatta Coll.= Catalogue by Sig. G. Jatta (1869).

    16. Taranto. Museum.

    17. Terranuova (Gela). Private collections.

    18. =Rome. Vatican= (=Mus. Gregoriano=). Guide by Helbig. Museo
              Capitolino. Museo Papa Giulio. Numerous private
              collections: Hartwig, Torlonia, Castellani, etc., and
              Deutsches Arch. Inst.

  XI. GREECE.

    1. =Athens. National Museum.= Catalogue by Couve and Collignon
              (1902). Do. (Acropolis Collection). Catalogue in
              progress. Trikoupis Coll. Other private collections.

    2. Eleusis. Museum (local finds).

    3. Candia (Crete).

  XII. ASIA MINOR.

      Smyrna. Various private collections.

  XIII. CYPRUS.

    Nicosia. Cyprus Museum. Catalogue by Myres and Richter (1899).

    Private collections at Larnaka, Nicosia, and Limassol.

  XIV. EGYPT.

    Cairo. Ghizeh Museum.

  XV. AMERICA.

    1. =Boston.= Catalogue by Robinson.

    2. New York. Metropolitan Museum. Atlas of Cesnola Collection from
              Cyprus published.

    3. Baltimore.

    4. Chicago.

-----

Footnote 1:

  _B.M. Guide to First and Second Egyptian Rooms_ (1904), p. 22; for
  early Neolithic pottery from Ireland see _Guide to Antiqs. of Stone
  Age_, p. 84.

Footnote 2:

  Remains of Neolithic pottery have recently been found in Crete
  (_J.H.S._ xxiii. p. 158) and in the Cyclades.

Footnote 3:

  _Cat. des Vases Antiques du Louvre_ i. p. 18.

Footnote 4:

  Miss Harrison, _Mythology and Monuments of Athens_, preface, p. ii.
  The Introduction to this work contains some excellent examples of the
  modern method of using vase-paintings to elucidate mythology.

Footnote 5:

  For the use of vase-paintings in illustration of Greek religious
  beliefs and customs, reference may be made to Miss Harrison’s
  _Prolegomena to Greek Religion_ (Cambridge Press, 1903), containing
  many interesting interpretations of scenes on the vases which may
  bear on the subject.

Footnote 6:

  See Chapter XIV., _ad fin._

Footnote 7:

  _Ant. Denkm._ i. 57.

Footnote 8:

  Cf. for instance Berlin 2154 (Endt, _Ion. Vasenm._ p. 29).

Footnote 9:

  Collignon, _Hist. de la Sculpt. Grecque_, i. p. 362.

Footnote 10:

  Gerhard, _Auserl. Vasenb._ 81.

Footnote 11:

  As, for instance, the subjects of Odysseus and Philoktetes; Orestes
  slaying Aegisthos; the death of Polyxena; Theseus fetching the ring
  from Amphitrite. Cf. Huddilston, _Lessons from Greek Pottery_, p. 28.

Footnote 12:

  _Museum Romanum_, Rome, 1690, fol.

Footnote 13:

  _Thesaur. Antiq. Rom._ xii. 955.

Footnote 14:

  _Thesaur. regii Brandenb._ vol. iii.

Footnote 15:

  _Ant. Expliq._ iii. pls. 71–77 (1719).

Footnote 16:

  _Etr. Regal._ 1723, fol.

Footnote 17:

  _Mus. Etr._ 1737–43.

Footnote 18:

  _Recueil_, 1752–67 (especially vols. i.–ii.).

Footnote 19:

  _Antiqs. Étr. Gr. et Rom., tirées du Cabinet de M. H._, fol. 1766–67.

Footnote 20:

  1791–1803. Plates for a fifth volume were prepared, but never
  regularly published (see Reinach, _Répertoire des Vases Peints_, ii.
  p. 334).

Footnote 21:

  _Peintures des Vases Antiques_, edited by M. Dubois-Maisonneuve, in
  two volumes, with Introduction (1808–10); now re-edited by S. Reinach
  (1891).

Footnote 22:

  _Vases Grecs_, Rome, 1813; _Vases de Coghill_, Rome, 1817; _Ancient
  Uned. Monuments_, London, 1822; the two former now re-edited by S.
  Reinach, 1891 and 1900.

Footnote 23:

  _Vases de Lamberg_, Paris, 1813–25; re-edited by S. Reinach, 1900.

Footnote 24:

  _Vasi de Blacas._ This was never actually published: see Reinach,
  _Répertoire_, ii. p. 383.

Footnote 25:

  _Disquisitions on the Painted Vases_, 1806.

Footnote 26:

  _Coll. of Antique Vases_, London, 1814.

Footnote 27:

  _Vasi Fittili_, 4 vols. 1833; _Mon. Etruschi_ (1824), vol. v.; _Gal.
  Omerica_, 3 vols. 1831–36, etc.

Footnote 28:

  _De’ vasi antichi dipinti_, 1806.

Footnote 29:

  _Gr. Vasengemälde_, 1797–1800.

Footnote 30:

  _Monumenti per servire alla storia degli ant. pop. ital._ 2nd edn.
  1833; _Monumenti inediti_, 1844.

Footnote 31:

  _Mon. Inéd._ 1828.

Footnote 32:

  _Gräber der Hellenen_, Berlin, 1837.

Footnote 33:

  _Descr. de quelques vases peints_, 1840.

Footnote 34:

  _Die Vasensammlung zu München_, Introduction.

Footnote 35:

  He gave the name of Etruria to the place in Staffordshire where he
  set up his pottery, after the supposed origin of the ancient vases.

Footnote 36:

  _Namen der Vasenbilder_, 1849.

Footnote 37:

  Vol. ii. p. 108.

Footnote 38:

  _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1832, p. 145 ff.

Footnote 39:

  _Peintures_, p. viii.

Footnote 40:

  _Der Stil u. Herkunft der gr. Vasen_, p. 46 ff.

Footnote 41:

  _Rapporto Volcente_, in _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1831, p. 98 ff.

Footnote 42:

  The names of the chief modern writers on the subject are given in the
  Bibliography, and in the notes to the Historical Chapters (VI.-XI.),
  where also brief bibliographies are given.

Footnote 43:

  The writer is indebted to the Introduction to M. Pottier’s admirable
  little Catalogue of the Vases in the Louvre for many ideas worked up
  in the foregoing pages.

Footnote 44:

  See Pottier’s Catalogue, i. p. 59.

Footnote 45:

  See the Introduction to Furtwaengler’s Catalogue.

Footnote 46:

  Cf. the lists given by Jahn, _Vasens. zu München_, pp. xi, xiv, with
  (for instance) the notes appended to the pages of Reinach’s
  _Répertoire_.

Footnote 47:

  The collection made by Baron Hirsch in Paris is now incorporated with
  this Museum.




                              CHAPTER II
          _SITES AND CIRCUMSTANCES OF DISCOVERY OF GREEK VASES_

    Historical and geographical limits of subject—Description of Greek
      tombs—Tombs in Cyprus, Cyrenaica, Sicily, Italy—Condition of
      vases when found—Subsequent restorations—Imitations and
      forgeries—Prices of vases—Sites on which painted vases have been
      found: Athens, Corinth, Boeotia, Greek islands, Crimea, Asia
      Minor, Cyprus, North Africa, Italy, Etruria—Vulci
      discoveries—Southern Italy, Sicily.


Before dealing with Greek vases in further detail, it may be as well to
say something of the circumstances under which, and the localities in
which, they have been discovered. And further, we must clearly define
the limits of our subject, both historically and geographically.

(1) =Historical.=—It may seem somewhat paradoxical to doubt whether the
primitive pottery found on Greek soil ought, strictly speaking, to be
called Greek. In a succeeding chapter we shall have occasion to touch
upon the question of the ethnological origin of this pottery, which, in
the opinion of some authorities, is not the product of Greeks as we
understand the term, but of some Oriental nation, such as the
Phoenicians. It is, however, enough for our present purpose that it has
been found on Greek soil, and that it forms a stage which we cannot
omit from a study of the development of Greek pottery, seeing that its
influence can be plainly traced on later fabrics.

Turning to the other limit of the subject, we find that nearly all the
latest vases, belonging to the period of the Decadence, were
manufactured in Southern Italy or Etruria. But nearly all bear so
unmistakably the stamp of Greek influence, however degenerate and
obscured, that we can only regard them as made by Greek artists settled
in the colonies of Magna Graecia, or at any rate by native workers in
direct imitation of the Greeks.

We may roughly define our historical limits as from 2500 B.C., the
approximate age of the early pottery of Crete, Cyprus, and Hissarlik,
down to 200 B.C., when the manufacture of painted vases came to an end
under the growing dominion of Rome. It was formerly supposed that the
senatorial edict of 186 B.C., forbidding the performance of
Bacchanalian ceremonies in Italy, was the means of putting an end to
this industry, but this is hardly borne out by facts; it rather died a
natural death owing to the growing popularity of relief-work both in
terracotta and in metal (see Chapters XI. and XXII.).

(2) =Geographical.=—Having defined our historical limits, it remains to
consider the extent of Greek civilisation during that period, as
attested by archaeological or other evidence. Besides the mainland of
Greece and the islands of the Aegean Sea, the whole of Asia Minor may
be regarded as in a measure Greek, although practically speaking only a
strip of territory along the western coast became really Hellenised,
and we shall not be concerned with pottery-finds in any other part of
the country.[48] To the north-east, Greek colonisation penetrated as
far as Kertch and other places in the Crimea, known to the ancients as
Panticapaeum and the Bosphoros respectively. In the Eastern
Mediterranean the island of Cyprus will demand a large share of our
attention. Egypt, again, has yielded large numbers of vases, mostly
from the two Greek settlements of Naukratis and Daphnae; and farther to
the west along the north coast of Africa was the Greek colony of
Kyrene, also a fruitful site for excavators.

The rest of the ground is covered by the island of Sicily and the
peninsular portion of Italy from Bologna southwards. Greek vases have
occasionally turned up in Spain, Gaul (_i.e._ France and North Italy),
as at Marseilles (Massilia), where primitive Greek pottery has been
found, and also in Sardinia; but the Western Mediterranean sites are
chiefly confined to Southern Italy and Etruria. In fact, till recent
years these regions were almost our only source of information on Greek
pottery, as has already been pointed out.

Generally speaking, it may be said that all Greek vases have been found
in tombs, but the circumstances under which they have been found differ
according to locality. We propose in the succeeding section to say
something of the nature of the ancient tombs, and the differences
between those of Greece, Cyprus, Italy, and other sites.

Of finds on the sites of temples and sanctuaries it is not necessary to
say much here; the explanation of such discoveries will receive some
attention in Chapter IV., and the individual sites will also be noted
in the next section of this chapter. It is a rare occurrence to find
complete vases under these circumstances, as they generally owe their
preservation to the fact that they have been broken in pieces and cast
away as rubbish into holes and pits. The most notable instance is the
remarkable series of fragments discovered on the Acropolis at Athens.

Greek tombs are not usually very remarkable in character,[49] being for
the most part small and designed for single corpses; this may possibly
account for the comparatively small size of the vases discovered on
most Hellenic sites. In the earlier tombs at Athens and Corinth the
pottery was found at a very great depth below the soil. The six
shaft-graves in the circle at Mycenae are of great size, and contained
large quantities of painted pottery; an exact reproduction of the
sixth, found by M. Stamatakis in 1878, with its contents, is in the
National Museum at Athens. Here also are reproductions of two typical
fifth-century Greek tombs containing sepulchral lekythi,[50] and
showing how the vases were arranged round the corpse.[51]

Rock-graves are seldom found in Greece, the normal form of tomb being a
hole or trench dug in the earth, either filled in with earth or covered
with tiles (as at Tanagra). The rock-grave is almost exclusively
Asiatic, but some fine specimens were found at Kertch in the
Crimea.[52] Some large ones have also been found in Rhodes,[53] but the
most typical form of tomb there is a square chamber cut out of the hard
clayey earth, approached by a square vertical shaft and a door. They
generally contained single bodies, round which were ranged vases and
terracotta figures. Sir A. Biliotti, in his diary of the excavations at
Kameiros (1864), also records the finding of tombs cut in the clay in
the form of longitudinal trenches, covered with flat stones forming a
vaulted roof. Others were merely troughs cut in the surface of the rock
and covered with stones and earth. In the shafts of the first type of
tomb large jars or p???? were often found containing the bones of
children (see page 152). Nearly all these tombs have yielded Greek
vases of all dates. In the island of Karpathos[54] Mr. J. T. Bent found
tombs containing early pottery, consisting of two or three chambers
with stone benches round the sides.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. INTERIOR OF COFFIN FOUND AT ATHENS, SHOWING
ARRANGEMENT OF VASES.]

The tombs of Cyprus are especially interesting for two reasons:
firstly, that they exhibit types not found elsewhere; and, secondly,
that they vary in size and character at different periods of the
island’s history. In the earliest tombs of the Bronze Age period (down
to about 800 B.C.) we find a very simple type, consisting of a mere
oven-like hole a few feet below the surface of the ground, with a short
sloping d??µ?? leading to it (Fig. 2). These tombs have very rarely
been found intact, and in most cases are full of fallen earth, so that
exact details of their original arrangement can seldom be obtained.
Each tomb generally contained a few exported Mycenaean vases and a
large number of local fabric, usually hand-made and rude in character.
The rich cemetery of Enkomi is, however, an exception, for here we find
large _built_ tombs, with roofs and walls of stone. Sometimes the
Bronze Age tombs were in the form of a deep well.[55]

[Illustration:

  From _Ath. Mitth._

  FIG. 2. DIAGRAM OF BRONZE AGE TOMBS, AGIA PARASKEVI, CYPRUS.
]

In the Graeco-Phoenician period (about 700–300 B.C.) the “oven” type of
tomb is preserved, but on a larger scale and at a greater depth, and
often reached by a long flight of stone steps. These tombs usually
contain large quantities of the local geometrical pottery, as many as
eighty or a hundred vases being sometimes found in one tomb. At Curium
and elsewhere, where the tombs contain Greek painted vases, they are
sometimes in the form of narrow ramifying passages.

The tombs of the Hellenistic period are of a very elaborate character,
especially those of Roman date, with long narrow d??µ?? leading to a
chamber some ten by twenty feet or more, round the walls of which are
sarcophagi and niches; but these tombs seldom contain any but plain and
inferior pottery, the manufacture of painted vases in the island having
come to an end, as in the rest of Greece.

Frequently a tomb was found to contain pottery of widely different
periods, especially in cemeteries such as Amathus and Curium, where the
finds are of all dates, showing that the tombs were used again and
again for burials.[56]

The tombs in the Cyrenaica, which were explored by Mr. Dennis and
contained many Greek vases, he describes as follows[57]: “The great
majority of the tombs were sunk in the rock, in the form of pits, from
6 to 7 feet long, from 3½ to 4½ feet wide, and from 5 to 6 feet
deep.... Vases were sometimes placed in all four corners of the
sepulchre, but this was rare; they were generally confined to two
corners, often to one. The most usual place was the corner to the right
of the head, and this was the place of honour; for here a Panathenaic
vase in the tomb of a victor, a ribbed amphora of glazed black ware, or
more commonly an ordinary wine-_diota_, would be deposited upright,
with a number of smaller vases within it, or at its foot, either
figured or of black or plain ware, according to the circumstances of
the deceased. Occasionally small vases, or sometimes terracotta
figures, were placed along the sides of the tomb, between the head and
feet of the corpse; but I do not remember ever to have found vases
deposited on the breast, or under the arms of the deceased, as was
often the case in the Greek tombs of Sicily.”

Mr. Arthur Evans has given an interesting account of the tombs at Gela
(Terranuova) in Sicily, from which he has excavated many fine vases for
the Ashmolean Museum.[58] Chronologically the limits of their date can
be ascertained, between the foundation of Gela in 589 B.C. and its
depopulation by the Carthaginians in 409 B.C., but a few tombs belong
to the subsequent period down to 284 B.C., when it was finally
destroyed by the Mamertines. In the early graves containing B.F. vases
skeletons were found; these tombs were in the form of terracotta cists
with gabled covers and tiled floors. The next stage, containing R.F.
vases, has vaulted roofs made of two pieces of stone. During this
period cremation-pits containing ashes and bones are sometimes found;
the burnt bones were placed in kraters and covered with shallow
vessels. In these were found white lekythi, in some respects rivalling
those of Athens; but the subjects are domestic rather than sepulchral,
and they are probably, like many of the B.F. and R.F. vases, local
fabrics. Some of the tombs with B.F. vases are in the form of chambers
with vaulted cement roofs. In the earlier tombs the disposition was
usually as follows: a kylix on the left side of the head, an alabastron
under the right arm, and a lekythos under the left (Fig. 3.). The tombs
of Selinus, which are all of early date, have been described by a local
explorer.[59]

[Illustration:

  From _Ashmolean Vases_.

  FIG. 3. DISPOSITION OF VASES IN TOMB AT
  GELA, SICILY.
]

We next review the types of tombs in Italy from which vases have been
obtained. Those at Vulci, and in the Etruscan territory generally, from
which the finest and largest vases have been extracted, are chambers
hewn in the rocks. The early tombs of Civita Vecchia and Cervetri are
tunnelled in the earth; in Southern Italy, especially in Campania, they
are large chambers, about two feet under the surface. In
D'Hancarville’s work (see p. 17) an illustration is given[60] of a tomb
in Southern Italy, which is constructed of large blocks of stone,
arranged in squared masses, called the Etruscan style of masonry, in
contradistinction to the Cyclopean. The walls are painted with
subjects, the body is laid upon the stone floor, and the larger vases,
such as the kraters, are placed round it. The jugs are hung upon nails
round the walls. Fig. 4. gives an example of a tomb of this kind from
Veii. A full account, with illustrations, of the tombs excavated in the
Certosa at Bologna about thirty years ago, has been given by Signor
Zannoni.[61] The tombs of Southern and Central Italy were made upon the
same plan, and the same description applies to both sites.[62]

The most ordinary tombs were constructed of rude stones or tiles, of a
dimension sufficient to contain the body and five or six vases; a small
one near the head and others between the legs, and on each side, more
often on the right than on the left side. An oinochoe and phiale were
usually found in every tomb; but the number, size, and quality of the
vases varied, probably according to the rank or wealth of the person
for whom the tomb was made. The better sort of tombs were of larger
size, and constructed with large hewn stones, generally without, but
sometimes completed with, cement; the walls were stuccoed, and
sometimes ornamented with painted patterns.

In these tombs, which were like small chambers, the body lay face
upwards on the floor, with the vases placed round it; sometimes vases
have been found hanging upon nails of iron or bronze, attached to the
side walls. The vases in the larger tombs were always more numerous, of
a larger size, and of a superior quality in every respect to those of
the ordinary tombs, which had little to recommend them except their
form.

Many of the larger and more important Etruscan tombs have also been
described and illustrated by Dennis in his work on Etruria, especially
those of Vulci and Corneto, which are famous both for their contents
and for the paintings which adorn their walls.[63] In the basement of
the British Museum may be seen large models of Etruscan tombs in which
the arrangement is carefully reproduced.

The vases, as we have already mentioned, are often ranged round the
dead, being hung upon or placed near the walls, or piled up in the
corners. Some hold the ashes of the deceased; others, small objects
used during life. They are seldom perfect, having generally either been
crushed into fragments by the weight of the superincumbent earth, or
else broken into sherds, and thrown into corners. Some exhibit marks of
burning, probably from having accompanied the deceased to the funeral
pyre. Sometimes they are dug up in a complete state of preservation,
and still full of the ashes of the dead.[64] These are sometimes found
inside a large and coarser vase of unglazed clay, which forms a case to
protect them from the earth.

[Illustration: FIG. 4. THE CAMPANA TOMB AT VEII, AS IT APPEARED WHEN
OPENED.]

                  *       *       *       *       *

Almost all the vases in the museums of Europe have been mended, and the
most skilful workmen at Naples and Rome were employed to restore them
to their pristine perfection. Their defective parts were scraped,
filed, rejoined, and supplied with pieces from other vases, or else
completed in plaster of Paris, over which coating the restored portions
were painted in appropriate colours, and varnished, so as to deceive
the inexperienced eye. But either through carelessness, or else owing
to the difference of process, the restorations had one glaring
technical defect: the inner lines are not of the glossy hue of the
genuine vases, and there is no indication of the thick raised line
which follows the original outline in the old paintings. Sometimes the
restorer pared away the ancient incrustation, and cut down to the
dull-coloured paste of the body of the vase. Sometimes he even went so
far as to paint figures in a light red or orange oil paint on the black
ground, or in black paint of the same kind on orange ground. But in all
these frauds the dull tone of colour, the inferior style of art, and
the wide difference between modern and ancient drawing and treatment of
subjects, disclose the deception. The calcareous incrustation deposited
on the vases by the infiltration into the tombs of water, containing
lime in solution, can be removed by soaking the vases in a solution of
hydrochloric acid.[65]

In other cases vases with subjects have been counterfeited by taking an
ancient vase covered entirely with black glaze, tracing upon it the
subject and inscription intended to be fabricated, and cutting away all
the black portions surrounding these tracings, so as to expose the
natural colour of the clay for the fictitious ground. When red figures
were intended to be counterfeited, the contrary course was adopted, the
part for the figures only being scraped away, and the rest left
untouched. Vases, indeed, in which the ground or figures are below the
surface should always be regarded with suspicion, and their genuineness
can only be determined by the general composition and style of the
figures, and by the peculiarities of the inscriptions. The latter also
are often fictitious, being painted in with colours imitating the true
ones, and often incised; indeed, nearly all inscriptions incised after
the vase has been baked are liable to give rise to suspicion. The
difference of style in the composition of groups, and especially small
points in the drawing, such as the over-careful drawing of details, the
indication of nails, and various other minute particulars, are also
criteria for detecting false or imitated vases. Water, alcohol, and
acids will remove false inscriptions, but leave the true ones intact.

Greek vases are not so easy to imitate as terracotta figures, the main
difficulty being the black varnish, which can never be successfully
reproduced. Acids or alcohol will always remove modern counterfeits,
but cannot touch the original substance. Since the discovery in Greece
of white-ground vases forgers have had a better chance, and they have
often ingeniously availed themselves of genuine ancient vases on which
to place modern paintings. But the antique drawing is exceedingly
difficult to imitate. In former times Pietro Fondi established
manufactories at Venice and Corfu, and the Vasari family at Venice, for
fictitious vases,[66] and many such imitations have been made at Naples
for the purpose of modern decoration.

The first to make such an attempt in England was the famous potter
Wedgwood, whose copy of the Portland Vase is well known. His paste is,
however, too heavy, and his drawings far inferior to the antique in
freedom and spirit. At Naples, chiefly through the researches and under
the direction of Gargiulo, vases were produced, which in their paste
and glaze resembled the antique, although the drawings were vastly
inferior, and the imitation could be at once detected by a practised
eye. They were, indeed, far inferior in all essential respects to the
ancient vases. Even soon after the acquisition of the Hamilton
collection by the public, the taste created for these novelties caused
various imitations to be produced. Some of the simplest kind were made
of wood, covered with painted paper, the subjects being traced from the
vases themselves, and this was the most obvious mode of making them.
Battam also made very excellent facsimiles of these vases, but they
were produced in a manner very different from that of the ancient
potters, the black colour for the grounds or figures not being laid on
with a glaze, but merely with a cold pigment which had not been fired,
and their lustre was produced by a polish. In technical details they
did not equal the imitations made at Naples, some of the best of which
deceived both archaeologists and collectors.

Sometimes illustrations of vases which never had any real existence
have appeared in publications. One of the most remarkable of these
fabricated engravings was issued by Bröndsted and Stackelberg in a fit
of archaeological jealousy. A modern archaeologist is seen running
after a draped woman called [PHÊMÊ], or “Fame,” who flies from him
exclaiming, [???S ??? ????], “A long way off, my fine fellow!” This
vase, which never existed except upon paper, deceived the credulous
Inghirami, who too late endeavoured to cancel it from his work. Other
vases, evidently false, have also been published.[67]

M. Tyszkiewicz, the great collector, in his entertaining
_Souvenirs_,[68] gives some interesting illustrations of the methods of
Italian forgers of vases, of which he had frequent experience. “The
Neapolitans,” he says, “excel above all others in this industry; and it
is in ancient Capua, now Sta. Maria di Capua Vetere, that the best
_ateliers_ for the manufacture of painted vases are situated.” But
“even the famous connoisseur Raimondi, who was considered the master of
his art at Sta. Maria—even he could never invent altogether the
decoration of a vase so as to make it pass for an antique. Only if this
talented artist could get just a few fragments of a fine vase, he was
clever enough to be able, by the aid of illustrations of vases in
museums or in private collections, to reconstruct the whole subject. He
replaced the missing parts, and threw such an air of uniformity over
the vase that it was almost impossible to tell what was modern. But if
you tried to wash a vase faked up in this manner, in pure alcohol
chemically rectified, you would find that the modern portions would
vanish, while the ancient paintings would remain. Neither Raimondi nor
any one else could ever manage to discover the secret of the ancient
potters—how to obtain the background of a brilliant black colour,
improperly known as the _varnish of Nola_. To disguise their failure in
this respect, the forgers are obliged, when the vase is entirely
reconstructed and repainted, to cover it all over with a varnish of
their own invention; but the surface of this varnish, although
brilliant, lacks the freshness and brightness of that used by the
ancients. Relatively this surface appears dull, and vanishes the moment
it is washed with alcohol.”

At Athens also, says M. Tyszkiewicz, laboratories have been established
for making vases, of which he was acquainted with three. These forgers
excel in turning out the white-ground vases, which, even when antique,
cannot resist the action of alcohol. For the same reason they apply
gilding to their black-and-red vases, because this also yields to its
action. The large prices fetched by the white vases (see below) have
stimulated their activity in this direction, and their efforts have not
been without artistic merit, though failing in technique.[69]

On the subject of forgeries in relation to Greek vases the literature
is very scanty; but reference may be made to Prof. Furtwaengler’s
_Neuere Fälschungen von Antiken_, which raises some very interesting
questions in regard to forgeries, though his conclusions may sometimes
be thought rather arbitrary.

Of the prices paid for painted vases in ancient times, no positive
mention occurs in classical authorities, yet it is most probable that
vases of the best class, the products of eminent painters, obtained
considerable prices. For works of inferior merit only small sums were
paid, as will be seen by referring to the account of the inscriptions
which were incised underneath their feet, and gave their contemporary
value (Chapter XVII.). In modern times we have no information about the
prices paid for these works of art till about seventy years ago, when
they began to realise considerable sums. In this country the
collections of Mr. Towneley, Sir W. Hamilton, Lord Elgin, and Mr. Payne
Knight all contained painted vases; but as they included other objects,
it is difficult to determine the value placed on the vases. The sum of
£8,400 was paid for the vases of the Hamilton collection, one of the
most remarkable of the time, and consisting of many beautiful specimens
from Southern Italy. The great discoveries of the Prince of Canino in
1827, and the subsequent sale of numerous vases, gave them, however, a
definite market value, to which the sale of the collection of Baron
Durand, which consisted almost entirely of vases, affords some clue.
His collection sold in 1836 for 313,160 francs, or about £12,524. The
most valuable specimen in the collection was the vase representing the
death of Kroisos (Fig. 132), which was purchased for the Louvre at the
price of 6,600 francs, or £264. The cup with the subject of Arkesilaos
(p. 342) brought 1,050 francs, or £42. Another magnificent vase, now in
the Louvre, with the subject of the youthful Herakles strangling the
serpents,[70] was only secured for France after reaching the price of
6,000 francs, or £240; another, with the subject of Herakles,
Deianeira, and Hyllos,[71] was purchased for the sum of 3,550 francs,
or £142. A krater, with the subject of Akamas and Demophon bringing
back Aithra, was obtained by Magnoncourt for 4,250 francs, or £170.[72]
An amphora of the maker Exekias (B 210) was bought by the British
Museum for £142. The inferior vases of course realised much smaller
sums, varying from a few francs to a few pounds; but high prices
continued to be obtained, and the sale by the Prince of Canino in 1837
of some of his finest vases contributed to enrich the museums of
Europe, although, as many of the vases were bought in, it does not
afford a good criterion as to price. An oinochoë with Apollo and the
Muses, and a hydria, with the same subject, were bought in for 2,000
francs, or £80 each. A kylix, with a love scene, and another with Priam
redeeming Hektor’s corpse,[73] brought 6,600 francs, or £264. An
amphora with the subject of Dionysos, and the Euphronios cup with
Herakles and Geryon (Plate XXXVIII.), sold for 8,000 francs, or £320
each. A vase with the subject of Theseus seizing Korone (Chap. XIV.),
another by Euthymides with the arming of Paris, and a third with Peleus
and Thetis, sold for 6,000 francs, or £240. The collector Steuart was
offered 7,500 francs, or £300, for a large krater, found in Southern
Italy, ornamented with the subject of Kadmos and the dragon; £120 was
paid by the British Museum for a fine krater ornamented with the
exploits of Achilles[74]; £100 for an amphora of Apulian style, with
the subject of Pelops and Oinomaos at the altar of the Olympian
Zeus.[75] For another vase, with the name of Mousaios, £120 was paid,
and £100 for the well-known Athenian prize vase excavated by
Burgon.[76] At Mr. Beckford’s sale the Duke of Hamilton gave £200 for a
lekythos representing a procession of Persians, which is now in the
British Museum (E 695). At Naples the passion for possessing fine vases
outstripped these prices; 2,400 ducats, or £500, was given for a vase
with gilded figures discovered at Capua. Still more incredible, early
in the nineteenth century, 8,000 ducats, or £1,500, was paid to
Vivenzio for the vase now in the Naples Museum representing the sack of
Troy; 6,000 ducats, or £1,000, for one with a Dionysiac feast; and
4,000 ducats, or £800, for the grand vase with the battle of the
Amazons, published by Schulz.[77] Another vase, for which the sum of
£1,000 was paid, was the so-called Capo di Monte Vase, purchased by Mr.
Edwards, at Naples.[78] For the large colossal vases of Southern Italy
from £300 to £500 has been given, according to their condition and
style. But such sums will not be hereafter realised, now that their
place in the estimation of the connoisseur has been rightly taken by
the fine red-figured or white ground vases, which, owing to the
stringency of modern laws, seldom now find their way into the market.
The vases with white grounds and polychrome figures have also been
always much sought after, and have realised large prices, the
best-preserved examples fetching as much as £70 or £100.[79] Generally
the highest prices have been paid for artistic merit, but these have
been surpassed in the case of some vases of high literary or historical
value. As a general rule vases with inscriptions have always been most
sought after, especially when the inscriptions are the signatures of
the names of potters or artists, or names of historical interest. The
inferior kinds have fetched prices much more moderate, the kylikes
averaging from £5 to £10, the amphorae from £10 to £20, the hydriae
about the same; the kraters from £5 to £20, according to their general
excellence, the oinochoae about £5, and other shapes from a few
shillings to a few pounds. The charming glaze and shapes of the vases
discovered at Nola have often obtained good prices from amateurs. Those
of Greece Proper have also fetched higher prices than those of Italy,
on account of the interest attached to the place of their discovery.[80]

                  *       *       *       *       *

We propose now to give a survey of the principal localities in which
the fictile products of the Greeks have been discovered, and the
excavations which have taken place on these sites. It need hardly be
said, however, that it is quite impossible to detail all the places
where specimens of common pottery have been found.

[Illustration: FIG. 5. MAP OF GREECE.]

                               I. GREECE

We naturally begin with Greece, following the geographical order
observed by Jahn,[81] as the mainland and centre of Hellenic
civilisation; and since Athens was not only the principal, for many
years the only, centre of the manufacture of Greek vases, but has also
been the most prolific source of recent discoveries, it is to Athens
that we first turn our attention.

=Athens= was duly celebrated in ancient times as the chief home of the
ceramic industry.[82] The clay of Cape Kolias is eulogised by Suidas
for its excellent qualities, and the extent of the ?e?aµe????, or
potters’ quarter, is still visible beyond the Dipylon gate. One of the
earliest painted vases found on Attic soil was the famous Panathenaic
amphora discovered by Burgon in 1813 outside the Acharnian gate, and
now in the British Museum.[83] The tomb in which it was found also
contained remains of burnt bones, a lekythos, and other small vases.
The subjects are: on one side Athena brandishing a spear, with the
inscription [???] [?T???T??] [?T???] [???], “I am a prize from the
games at Athens”; on the other, a man driving a _biga_, or two-horse
chariot. The date is usually considered to be about 560 B.C. It was
rightly identified by the early writers as one of the prize-vases
described by Pindar in the passage we have quoted elsewhere (p. 132),
and was the means of identifying many other vases similarly painted and
inscribed, but found on other sites, as belonging to the same class. A
considerable number of vases found on Greek soil, mostly at Athens,
were published by Stackelberg in 1837,[84] but little was done for many
years in the way of systematic excavation. The National Museum was
opened shortly after the declaration of Greek independence, and
assisted by royal benefactions. The law forbidding the export of
antiquities has now been in force for many years, but unfortunately has
had a bad as well as a good effect, in that the vendors of
surreptitious finds are wont to give imaginary accounts of the
circumstances of their discoveries, in order to screen themselves.

To give anything like a description of the vases found at Athens would
be useless here, where so many classes are illustrated by the finds; it
may, however, be worth while to note a few of the most typically
Athenian groups of pottery. (1) Earliest in date are the Dipylon vases,
which were found outside the gate of that name, and have from their
conspicuous character given a name to a whole class. They are, however,
fully treated of in Chapter VII. (2) The numerous fragments of vases
found on the Acropolis, which can all be dated anterior to 480 B.C.,
include many exceedingly beautiful and unique specimens of the
transitional period of vase-painting, some having black, some red
figures.[85] Although in few cases anything more than fragments have
been preserved, yet these fragments are enough to show that the
originals were masterpieces surpassing even the finest examples from
the Italian cemeteries. They will, it is to be hoped, shortly be made
known to the world by means of an exhaustive catalogue. (3) The white
lekythi, discussed at length elsewhere (Chapter XI.), besides forming a
class by themselves, are specially remarkable as being almost peculiar
to Athens. It is not, however, certain that they were not made also at
Eretria, where many fine ones have been found of late years; but
otherwise none have been found outside Attica, with the exception of a
few importations to Cyprus, Locri in Italy, or Sicily. (4) A group of
late R.F. vases of the “fine” style, mostly of small size and sometimes
with polychrome decoration. The drawing is free and graceful, but tends
to carelessness; the subjects are drawn chiefly from the life of women
and children. Some of the smaller specimens were no doubt actually
children’s playthings.

Elsewhere in Attica vases have not been numerous. _Eleusis_ has yielded
some interesting fragments,[86] including a plaque of about 400 B.C.,
with an interesting representation of the local deities, found in 1895;
at _Marathon_ the grave of the fallen warriors has been recently
explored, and was found to contain both B.F. and R.F. vases, but none
of particular merit.[87] The find was, however, important, as
illustrating Greek methods of burial. The tombs of _Phaleron_ are
important, as having yielded a special class of early vases which are
known by the name of the site.[88] These Phaleron vases combine in an
interesting manner the characteristics of the Geometrical and Rhodian
or Oriental styles, being akin to the so-called Proto-Corinthian. The
beehive tombs at _Menidi_ and _Spata_ and other tombs at _Haliki_, near
Marathon, have yielded Mycenaean pottery of the usual types, and an
instructive find of early Geometrical pottery has been made at
_Aphidna_.[89] There are vases in the museums of Athens and Berlin of
various dates, to which the following provenances are assigned: Alike,
Alopeke, Hymettos,[90] Kephissia, Cape Kolias,[91] Pikrodaphni,[92]
Peiraeus,[93] Sunium,[94] Thorikos,[95] Trakhones,[96] Vari,[97]
Velanideza, and Vourva, the two latter near Marathon.[98] _Megara_[99]
has produced little beyond specimens of a class of late bowls with
designs in relief, sometimes known as “Megarian bowls,” but more
probably of Boeotian origin (see p. 53).

=Corinth=, as a centre of the manufacture of vases, occupied in early
times a position in Greece only second to Athens. Down to the first
half of the sixth century it actually seems to have held the
pre-eminence; but after the rise of Athens it sank altogether into
obscurity, and ceased to produce any pottery at all after about 520
B.C. But we know from Strabo[100] that the fame of Corinthian wares
still existed in Roman times, for in the days of Julius Caesar the
tombs of the new Colonia Julia were ransacked for the vases which were
the admiration of the rich nobles of Rome. The expression used by
Strabo, ?st?????a t??e?µata, seems to imply that these were probably
specimens of the later relief-ware which did not become popular in
Greece before the fourth century, but then gradually ousted the painted
fabrics.

Corinth, like Athens, claimed the invention of pottery and of the
wheel; it was also one of the supposed centres of the origin of
painting in Greece. We read, moreover, that when Demaratos fled thence
to Italy he took with him two artists named Eucheir and Eugrammos, who
doubtless helped to develop the art of vase-making in Etruria. The
vases found here are nearly all of the early archaic and B.F. periods,
from the so-called Proto-Corinthian wares down to ordinary B.F.
fabrics. The Mycenaean and Geometrical styles are practically
unrepresented, but occasional finds have been made of Attic B.F. and
R.F. vases. With these exceptions all were actually made at Corinth, as
is shown in many cases by the inscriptions in the local alphabet
painted upon the vases.

The earliest discovery, and in some respects one of the most
remarkable, was the vase known as the Dodwell pyxis (see p. 315), which
was acquired by that traveller in 1805, and is now at Munich. In 1835 a
large number of vases were found by peasants at Chiliomodi, the ancient
_Tenea_,[101] one of which represented Herakles and the Centaur Nessos;
most of these are now at Athens. In 1843 Ross[102] records the
discovery of over a thousand at various sites, on the Isthmus and at or
near Tenea, and ever since that time tomb-digging has been carried on
without intermission. The best collections of Corinthian vases are
those at Athens, Berlin, and the British Museum. But the most
noteworthy find at Corinth has been that of the series of plaques
(p??a?e?) or votive tablets discovered at Penteskouphia in 1879, most
of which are now at Berlin. They are all of votive character, and come
from the rubbish-heap of a temple of Poseidon; most of them are painted
with figures of and inscribed with dedications to that deity, and they
belong to the late seventh or early sixth century B.C.[103] The British
Museum possesses a R.F. “pelike” from _Solygea_, near Corinth, and
isolated finds are also recorded from _Sikyon_.[104]

Turning to the adjoining state of Argolis, we find three sites of
special importance in early times—Mycenae, Tiryns, and Argos. Of these
the two former had ceased to have any importance in historic times, but
this is amply compensated for by the wonderful discoveries of the
Mycenaean period.[105] At _Mycenae_ large quantities of painted pottery
were found in the six shaft-tombs in the Agora, five of which were
excavated by Dr. Schliemann; outside the Acropolis, and possibly
belonging to a later period, was found the remarkable vase with figures
of warriors marching.[106] The finds at _Tiryns_ were chiefly
fragmentary, but at _Nauplia_, where considerable quantities were
found, there were some fragments with painted designs of chariots like
the vases from Cyprus (p. 246).[107] Mycenaean pottery has also been
found at _Asine_,[108] and the site of the Heraion at _Argos_, recently
excavated by the American School, has yielded an exhaustive series of
fragments of pottery, representative of nearly every known fabric from
Mycenaean times down to the best Greek period. They have not as yet
been published, but may be expected to yield important results. Other
occasional finds are reported from Argos, including a curious archaic
vase with a representation of Herakles and Kerberos.[109] At _Kleonae_,
on the northern frontier of the state, was found a Corinthian vase
signed by Timonidas, and there are vases from _Hermione_ in the museum
at Athens.[110]

In the rest of the Peloponnese finds of painted vases have been
exceedingly rare. The Berlin Museum possesses a B.F. vase found at
_Megalopolis_,[111] and isolated finds are also recorded from _Magoula_
in Laconia and _Amyklae_ near Sparta.[112] At _Olympia_ painted vases
were very rare, but several different fabrics from the Proto-Corinthian
downwards are represented by fragments.[113]

In Central and Northern Greece the only fruitful region has been
=Boeotia=, particularly its capital, _Thebes_. This city, like Corinth,
has principally yielded early vases. As has been shown elsewhere (pp.
286, 300), Boeotia was the home of more than one indigenous fabric,
notably the local variety of Geometrical ware, partly parallel with
that of Athens and other sites, partly a degenerate variety with local
peculiarities, forming a transition to the Phaleron and
Proto-Corinthian fabrics. The last-named have frequently been found at
Thebes, notably the Macmillan lekythos in the British Museum. Signed
vases of local fabric, with the names of Gamedes, Menaidas, and
Theozotos, are in the British Museum and in the Louvre. On the site of
the Temple of the Kabeiri, near Thebes, a remarkable series of late
B.F. pottery came to light, evidently a local fabric, with dedicatory
inscriptions and subjects of a grotesque or caricatured nature.[114]
They are quite peculiar to the site, and seem to have had a close
connection with its religious rites. Besides many examples of the
Geometrical and Corinthian fabrics, there have been found at Thebes
several specimens of the so-called Megarian bowls with reliefs, of the
second century B.C.; the proportion to other sites is such that Thebes
has been thought to be the centre of the fabric. Another local fabric
is that produced by _Tanagra_ about the end of the fifth century B.C.,
consisting of small cups, toilet-boxes, etc., with somewhat naïve
outlined designs.[115] The vase-finds here have served as evidence for
the dating of the terracotta statuettes, with which no painted fabrics
were found, but only ribbed or moulded black-glaze wares,
characteristic of the fourth and third centuries B.C.[116] Where
painted vases have been found, the accompanying statuettes were all of
an archaic or even primitive type.[117]

In excavations at _Orchomenos_ in 1893[118] the French School unearthed
large numbers of fragments, Mycenaean, Boeotian Geometrical,
Proto-Corinthian, Corinthian, and Attic black-figured; Mycenaean vases
have been found at _Lebadea_, and Thespiae, Thisbe, and Akraiphiae are
also mentioned as sites where painted vases have been found.[119] Very
few sites in Northern Greece have yielded finds of pottery, but the
Athens Museum contains R.F. vases from _Lokris_, _Phokis_, and
_Lamia_[120] on the Malian Gulf, and finds are also recorded from
Anthedon,[121] Atalante,[122] Exarchos, and Galaxidi in Lokris, from
Elateia,[123] Abae,[124] and Daulis in Phokis, and from Thessaly.
Fragments of painted pottery were seen by early travellers at
_Delphi_.[125] At _Daulis_ the pottery was of Mycenaean character,[126]
as also that from the beehive-tombs of Volo in Thessaly and its
neighbourhood. A recent excavation at _Dimini_ is reported to have
yielded very early painted vases of a quite new, probably local ware,
with affinities to the Cycladic types of Thera and elsewhere.[127]

Turning now to the Greek islands, we find somewhat more extensive and
interesting results. Little indeed has been found in the Ionian Islands
of the western coast,[128] even in _Corfu_, which as a rule has been
fruitful in works of art. The only vases worth mentioning from that
island are those found in the cemetery of Kastrades, in the tomb of
Menekrates.[129] The contents of this tomb, which are all of an early
and somewhat mixed character, are now in the British Museum; they can
be dated from the inscription on the tomb about 600 B.C. Travelling
round by the south of the Peloponnese, we come to _Kythera_, which has
yielded a cup (now in the British Museum) remarkable for its
inscription, ?µ???t?????; it is illustrated below, p. 135.
_Salamis_[130] again has produced little, but some interesting pottery
of a transitional character from Mycenaean to Geometrical has been
found.[131]

=Aegina= appears to have been a pottery centre in early times, and
recent discoveries are adding to our knowledge of its fabrics. Among
the older finds from this island are a fine early oinochoe in the
British Museum (from the Castellani collection), formerly supposed to
be from Thera,[132] and several very fine red-figured and white-ground
vases, notably the elegant R.F. astragalos or knucklebone-shaped vase
in the British Museum, with its figures of dancers; a white Athenian
lekythos, with the subject of Charon,[133] and two beautiful vases now
in the Munich Museum (208, 209), with polychrome designs on a white
ground.[134] In 1892–93 the British Museum acquired a series of
Mycenaean, Corinthian, and Attic vases from a find on this island,[135]
and other examples of Corinthian and Attic vases are recorded.[136] In
1894 excavations were made on the site of the so-called temple of
Aphrodite, and yielded a number of early vases chiefly Mycenaean,
Geometrical of the Athenian type, and a large series of
Proto-Corinthian wares, some of unusual size.[137] Some of this pottery
may possibly be of local fabric. More recently the excavations on the
site of the great Doric temple (now shown to be dedicated to the
goddess Aphaia) have yielded an extensive series of fragments of
different dates.[138] Aegina was always celebrated in antiquity for its
artistic achievements, and that it was a centre for pottery is
indicated by an anonymous comic writer, who addresses the island as
“rocky echo, vendor of pots” (??t??p????).[139]

=Euboea= possessed two important art-centres in Chalkis and Eretria. It
is true that no vases have actually been found at Chalkis, but the
existence of early B.F. vases with inscriptions in the local dialect
amply testifies to the existence of potteries there (see p. 321).
_Eretria_, on the other hand, has been carefully excavated in recent
years, and has yielded many antiquities both of the early and of the
finest period. Among the former are vases of a type akin to the earlier
Attic fabrics, but distinguished by the use of a “pot-hook” decorative
ornament, and others more akin to the Attic B.F. vases, but clearly of
local make[140]; among the latter are so many fine white-ground lekythi
(as well as other forms) that it has been supposed that they must have
been specially manufactured here as well as at Athens. The British
Museum has lately acquired several white-ground and late R.F. vases of
considerable beauty from this site. Many years ago an inscribed
Corinthian vase was found at Karystos.[141]

=The Cyclades.=—In these islands we find traces of absolutely the
earliest fabrics known in the history of Greek pottery, but later finds
of painted vases are comparatively rare. Mycenaean pottery has been
found in the islands of Amorgos,[142] Delos and Rheneia, Kythnos,
Seriphos, Sikinos, Syros, Thera, and Melos.[143] Other finds recorded
are from Paros and Antiparos (early fabrics), Keos, Kimolos,[144]
Kythnos,[145] Siphnos, and Syros[146]; a remarkable Ionic vase in the
Louvre, found in Etruria, has also been attributed to an island fabric,
that of Keos,[147] and another at Würzburg to that of Naxos.[148] The
chief finds of “Cycladic” or pre-Mycenaean pottery are those from the
volcanic deposits of the island of _Thera_ (see p. 260), which, from
the circumstances of their discovery and the geological history of the
island, are supposed to date back beyond 2000 B.C. They are painted
with vegetable patterns in brown on a white ground, and have chiefly
been excavated by the French School during the years 1867–74; a few are
in Athens, but the majority are in the Louvre or the Sèvres Museum. In
the superincumbent layers Mycenaean and Geometrical pottery came to
light,[149] and a fragment of a large Melian amphora with the so-called
Asiatic Artemis, now in the Berlin Museum (No. 301), is stated by Ross
to have come from this island. The same traveller saw here large p????
with painted subjects of early character and similar smaller vases,
also some with black figures, in a private collection.[150] More
recently (in 1900) excavations made in the Acropolis cemetery by German
archaeologists yielded a large quantity of pottery, chiefly Geometrical
in character, extending from the eighth to the middle of the sixth
century B.C.[151]

The vases found in _Melos_ amount to a considerable number, of
different ages and styles.[152] Recent excavations by the British
School on the site of Phylakopi brought to light large quantities, not
only of Mycenaean, but of pre-Mycenaean remains, including
pottery.[153] Mr. Thomas Burgon’s collection included many B.F. and
later vases from Melos, now in the British Museum; they are mostly
small and unimportant. Ross also saw painted vases in Melos.[154] The
island is, however, chiefly celebrated for a class of early vases, few
in number, but of exceptional merit, which have mostly been found in
the island, and so are known as “Melian” amphorae (see below, p. 301).
Recently, however, large numbers of fragments of similar pottery have
been found at Rheneia, opposite Delos, and it is possible that Delos
was the centre of the fabric, not Melos, as hitherto supposed.[155]
They date from the seventh century B.C. Among the finds of later date
from Melos, by far the most noteworthy is the Louvre Gigantomachia
krater (see Chapter XII.).[156]

Turning now to the eastern group of Aegean Islands, known as the
_Sporades_, we begin with _Lesbos_, where many fragments of B.F. and
R.F. vases were found by Mr. Newton during his Vice-Consulate. From
epigraphical evidence it seems probable that many of the early B.F.
fragments found at Naukratis (see below) should be attributed to a
Lesbian fabric, but this has not so far been established. Vases have
also been found in Tenedos and Chios.[157]

Next we come to _Samos_, an island always renowned in antiquity for its
fictile ware. The Homeric hymn to the potters is addressed to Samians.
It was, however, in Roman times that its renown was especially great,
and its connection with a certain class of red glazed wares has caused
the name of “Samian Ware” to be applied indiscriminately but falsely to
all Roman pottery of that kind.[158] Finds of pottery have, however,
been few and far between. The British Museum possesses a lekythos of
the B.F. period in the form of a sandalled foot (Plate XLVI.), which
Mr. Finlay obtained here. More recently Dr. Böhlau excavated some early
cemeteries, and found a considerable quantity of pottery of the “Ionic”
type, which enabled him to establish a Samian origin for certain wares
of the sixth century.[159] _Kalymnos_ was explored by Mr. Newton in
1856, but has yielded little beyond plain glazed ware,[160] and the
same may be said of Kos, although the latter was famed in antiquity for
its amphorae and culinary vessels. The small islands of _Telos_,[161]
_Nisyros_, _Chiliodromia_,[162] and _Karpathos_ have been explored at
different times by Ross, Theodore Bent, and others, and have yielded
vases of a late R.F. period, corresponding to the later Athenian
fabrics, several of which are in the British Museum. Messrs. Bent and
Paton have also found pottery of the Mycenaean period in Kalymnos and
Karpathos[163]; and similar remains are reported from _Kos_.[164]

But all other discoveries in the islands are far exceeded both in
extent and importance by those of =Rhodes=.[165] They are principally
due to the labours of Messrs. Salzmann and Biliotti, who diligently
explored the island during the ’sixties, and the results as far as
pottery is concerned, extend from Mycenaean times down to the
destruction of Kameiros in 404 B.C. The earliest finds were on the site
of _Ialysos_, and these are exclusively of “Mycenaean” type. The tombs
containing Mycenaean vases were cut in the rock in quadrangular form,
with vaulted d??µ?? and steps. This site was explored by the
above-named gentlemen about the years 1867–70, and the results of the
excavation, by the liberality of Prof. Ruskin, found their way into the
British Museum. Their archaeological value was not recognised for some
years; but when the discoveries of Mycenae became known, it was at once
seen that the Ialysos pottery must fall into line with them.

_Kameiros_ is first heard of as a Dorian colony of the eleventh
century, and its history extends down to 408 B.C. It was fully and
systematically excavated between 1859 and 1864. Far more abundant and
comprehensive than the Ialysos results, the Kameiros finds illustrate
the history of Greek pottery from the Geometrical period[166] down to
the time of its decline, and include many fine specimens of the B.F.
and R.F. periods, as well as numerous examples of the Rhodian,
Corinthian, and other early classes, from the eighth to the sixth
century B.C. The most interesting discovery was perhaps that of the
_pinax_, with the fight over the body of Euphorbos, which is described
elsewhere (p. 335). Among the finer specimens of the later period is
the polychrome _pelike_ with Peleus wooing Thetis. The majority of
these finds are now in the British Museum, together with porcelain,
bronze, and other objects illustrating the early pottery; part also
went to the Louvre and to Berlin. The latest vases are of the free and
careless type of late R.F. Athenian fabrics, and since they are known
to be not later than the fifth century they supply valuable evidence
for the dating of R.F. vases.

=Crete= in all probability will, before many years are over, supply a
great mass of material for the history of early Greek pottery. Until
recent years it has received little attention from travellers or
explorers, and few vases of any period have come therefrom into our
Museums.[167] But Crete has always been looked to by archaeologists for
the solution of the Mycenaean problem, and the systematic excavations
now at length set on foot are even richer in their yield of Mycenaean
and primitive pottery than those of Rhodes, Melos, and Cyprus. Mr. J.
L. Myres found at _Kamarais_ in 1894 a series of fragments of painted
pottery with designs in opaque colours on a black ground, which he
regarded as pre-Mycenaean.[168] This theory was subsequently borne out
by the discoveries of Messrs. Arthur Evans and D. G. Hogarth at
_Knossos_ and elsewhere, which have been very rich in pottery of a
similar kind, and also in vases with remarkably naturalistic patterns
in relief.[169] Other finds have been made in the Dictaean Cave,[170]
at Zakro[171] and Palaeokastro,[172] at Phaestos,[173] Praesos, Erganos
and Kourtes, and Kavousi.[174]

Before we turn our attention to the continent of Asia we must hark back
to the European mainland, working round by the northern coasts of the
Aegaean and Euxine Seas. Macedonia and Thrace have yielded scarcely
anything,[175] but when we come to the northern shore of the Black Sea
we find at _Kertch_, in the Crimea (the ancient Panticapaeum), a
remarkable centre of Greek artistic production. The finds here are
practically limited to one period, covering little more than a hundred
years, and mainly illustrate the art of the fourth century B.C. There
are, however, many magnificent vases, which in style, if not in shape
or composition of subjects, must belong to an earlier time—namely, that
of the fine red-figured period.[176] The excavations have mostly been
undertaken by the Russian Government, in whose museum at the Hermitage
the collections are now to be seen, but much was done unsystematically
by Englishmen and others at the time of the Crimean War. It cannot be
said that more than about one-quarter of the total find of 400 vases
have any merit; they are chiefly small, with red figures, and of the
later fine period; some are polychrome and ornamented with
gilding.[177] The most remarkable by far is the vase signed by the
Athenian Xenophantos (p. 447); but that with the contest of Athena and
Poseidon (Plate L.) is also an exceptionally fine specimen; and others
have interesting subjects relating to the Eleusinian mysteries. At
_Phanagoria_ an early B.F. vase of Ionic style came to light.[178]
Vases have also been found at Olbia on the neighbouring mainland, at
Kief, at Temir Gora in Circassia, and on the modern sites of Blisnitza,
Iouz Oba, Melek Chesme and Pavlovski-Kourgane in the Crimea.[179]

                             II. ASIA MINOR

_The Troad_ first claims our attention. Here on the site of the second
city of Troy, at Hissarlik, Dr. Schliemann found the earliest pottery
at present known from Greek soil (see Chapter VI.). This has been
generally dated about 2500–2000 B.C. In subsequent excavations Dr.
Dörpfeld proved the sixth city to be the Homeric Troy, the remains from
which, including pottery, are all of Mycenaean character. Later finds
of pottery from the Troad are of no great importance[180]; some are of
Aeolic or Ionian origin, and others seem to be from an inferior local
fabric, consisting of flat bowls with looped side-handles, carelessly
painted in matt-black silhouette with figures of ducks and other
animals. Some of these were found in 1855–56 by Mr. Brunton on the
sites of New Ilium and Dardanus; others by Mr. Calvert in 1875–76, and
by Dörpfeld and Brueckner in 1893. The finds of the two first-named are
in the British Museum, together with some poor R.F. vases of late
style. From _Sigeion_ two polychrome lekythi have been reported,
resembling the Attic white-ground fabric[181]; Jahn also records finds
of painted vases from _Lampsakos_ and Parion,[182] and a fine gilded
vase with figures in relief has recently been found on the former
site.[183]

In _Aeolis_ and _Mysia_ the finds have not been considerable, but some
are of importance as throwing light on the existence of local fabrics.
In a private collection at Smyrna there is or was a late B.F. vase from
Assos, with careless silhouette figures.[184] At _Pitane_ a very
curious Mycenaean false amphora has been found, with figures of marine
and other animals[185]; and at _Larisa_ Dr. Böhlau has found fragments
of early painted vases, probably a local fabric imitating that of
Rhodes.[186] MM. Pottier and Reinach, in the course of their
excavations at Myrina (1884–85), found pottery of various dates and
styles: Mycenaean, Ionian, Corinthian, Attic B.F. and R.F., late R.F.,
and vases of the so-called Gnatia style (see p. 488) or with
reliefs.[187] Among those which can be traced to an Ionic or local
fabric there is a very remarkable one with a head of a bearded man.
Pergamon does not seem to have yielded any vases, but _Kyme_ may have
been a centre of Ionic vase-manufacture (see Chapter VIII.). Some
fragments of an early B.F. krater have been found there which presents
similar characteristics to those of the Ionian fabrics mentioned
below.[188]

Coming lower down the coast of Ionia we meet with the home of an
important school of painting in the sixth century, which seems to have
centred in the flourishing cities of Phocaea, Clazomenae and elsewhere
round the Gulf of Smyrna. The actual finds of such vases in the
neighbourhood is not great, but is compensated for by the remarkable
series of painted terracotta sarcophagi discovered at Clazomenae, the
finest of which is now in the British Museum. These, which obviously
represent the characteristics of the Ionian school of painting, show
such a close relation with a series of vases found at Naukratis and
Daphnae in Egypt, and at Cervetri and elsewhere in Italy,

[Illustration:

  MAP OF ASIA MINOR & THE ARCHIPELAGO
  Showing sites on which painted vases have been found.
  FIG. 6.
]

that the latter classes can only be regarded as of Ionian origin, or,
if not imported, local Italian imitations of the Ionic wares. Such are
the Caeretan hydriae which were directly imitated by the Etruscans.[189]

A vase obtained at _Phocaea_ by Mr. W. M. Ramsay in 1880 (p. 254)
appears to be an imported Cypriote fabric of late date, though archaic
in appearance. At Smyrna little has been found, but there are some
vases attributed thereto in the Leyden Museum. At _Clazomenae_ some
fragments of painted vases in the style of the Caeretan hydriae have
recently been found, which help to establish the theories above
mentioned.[190] _Teos_ is associated with a particular kind of cup
(???a? ??????a?) mentioned by the poet Alcaeus,[191] but nothing has
been found there, nor yet at Kolophon, Ephesos, or Miletos. In the
interior regions of Asia primitive painted pottery is recorded from
_Mount Sipylos_,[192] and also from _Sardis_ on the sites of the tombs
of the Lydian kings. From the tumulus known as Bin Tepe on the latter
site the British Museum has obtained (through the agency of Mr. Dennis)
some early pottery, which is decorated apparently in direct imitation
of Phoenician glass wares. Fragments of Mycenaean and other primitive
fabrics are reported from Cappadocia and from Gordion in Galatia,[193]
and have been recently picked up by Prof. W. M. Ramsay at Derbe in
Lycaonia.

In _Caria_ early local fabrics seem to be indicated by finds at Mylasa
and Stratonikeia (Idrias).[194] At _Assarlik_ Mr. W. R. Paton found
pottery of a transitional character from Mycenaean to Geometrical.
Tralles and Knidos were famous in antiquity for pottery,[195] but have
left virtually nothing, nor has Halicarnassos. A Mycenaean false
amphora is reported from Telmessos in Lycia, and fragments of B.F. and
R.F. vases from Xanthos.[196]

From the distant site of _Susa_ in Persia an interesting find has been
recently reported,[197] of part of a R.F. rhyton in the form of a
horse’s head, on which is painted the figure of a Persian in polychrome
on a white ground. It belongs to the period 500–480 B.C., and may have
been carried off by the Persians when they sacked the Athenian
Acropolis.

=Cyprus.=—This island is of special interest to us as being now the
only classical land in our own possession. Although we have not perhaps
utilised to the full extent the opportunities thereby afforded us for
excavations, yet of late years much has been done, especially by the
British Museum, to remedy this defect, and the collection of Cypriote
antiquities in the national museum is now fully worthy of that
institution and as representative as could be wished. Previous to the
English occupation the island remained undisturbed, with a few
exceptions, the first being the excavations of Mr. R. Lang at Dali
(Idalion) in 1867. The finds here were chiefly of terracottas and
sculpture, and are now in the British Museum, but, owing to the
misconception of Cypriote history that formerly prevailed, have been
somewhat incongruously placed in the Oriental Department. Meanwhile,
another consul, General L. Cesnola, was not slow to make use of his
opportunities, seeing in the obvious richness of the field, the chances
of gaining great distinction as an explorer. Of his energy and
liberality in the cause there can be little doubt; but he was not an
archaeologist, and did not realise the value of scientific evidence,
negative or positive. Hence, although he deserves a meed of praise as
the pioneer of Cypriote exploration, his statements are not always
sufficiently explicit to be used without hesitation. His extensive
collections are now in the Metropolitan Museum at New York; the British
Museum has a few of the vases, but lost the opportunity of acquiring
the whole. Another English consul, Mr. Sandwith, also made a collection
of Cypriote pottery, and, with an acuteness in advance of his time,
made a successful attempt to classify it according to periods and
styles. Lastly, a brother of General Cesnola’s, A. P. di Cesnola, who
lived for some time in the island, made large collections in the same
manner as his brother, but with the same lack of scientific accuracy.

The record of discoveries since 1878 has been carefully systematised by
Mr. J. L. Myres, who has given an excellent summary of results.[198]
The cemeteries in which the island is so extraordinarily rich may be
divided into two classes: Bronze Age tombs, including Mycenaean and
earlier remains; and Graeco-Phoenician, with tombs of Hellenistic and
Roman date. On some sites, such as Curium and Salamis, tombs of all
periods are found.

[Illustration: FIG. 7. MAP OF CYPRUS.]

Mr. Myres notes about thirty sites on which Bronze Age pottery has been
discovered, mostly in the centre and east of the island, _i.e._ in the
more level and cultivated districts. The most important sites are
Enkomi (Salamis), Curium, Alambra, Agia Paraskevi (Nicosia), Maroni,
and Larnaka (several sites), at all of which Mycenaean pottery has been
found, Enkomi being especially rich in this respect; others only
contained local varieties, either of the earliest incised wares or of
the hand-made pottery which seems to have been a later development.

Graeco-Phoenician pottery (700–300 B.C.) has been found in great
quantities in all parts of the island, chiefly at Amathus, Dali,
Larnaka (Kition), Curium, Poli (Marion), Paphos (Kouklia), Salamis, and
Tamassos. In conjunction therewith Hellenic vases have appeared at
Amathus, Curium, Salamis, and especially at Poli, where some really
fine R.F. vases have been found, some with artists’ names.[199]
Hellenistic pottery has appeared on most of the above sites, Poli and
Curium supplying the best examples. The different varieties of Cypriote
pottery are described in detail in Chapter VI.

                              III. AFRICA

Greek settlements in Africa were far fewer than in Asia, and in fact
only two appear to have had any importance, these being the Ionic
colony in the Egyptian Delta and the Dorian colony from Thera in the
Cyrenaica. Mycenaean vases have, however, appeared spasmodically in
Egyptian tombs of the eighteenth to twenty-first dynasties, the
evidence for the date of those at Tell-el-Amarna (c. 1400 B.C.) being
apparently well established. It should also be noted that pre-Mycenaean
wares corresponding to the second city pottery at Hissarlik and the
Kamaraes (Crete) pottery have been found at Kahun and elsewhere in the
_Fayûm_, in tombs of the twelfth and thirteenth dynasties (2500–2000
B.C.).[200]

Painted and other pottery of the Hellenistic age has not infrequently
been found in Egypt; the British Museum acquired a specimen from
_Alexandria_ in 1898 with a boy riding on a fish painted in opaque pink
and blue on a red unglazed ground. Other examples come from
Naukratis,[201] and from the Fayûm.[202] At Alexandria, where for
obvious reasons no vases earlier than the third century could have come
to light, a hydria was found in the catacombs with a myrtle-wreath
painted on a light ground; this when discovered was filled with
bones.[203] Other vases of the same type are said to be in the Louvre.
In Mons. G. Feuardent’s collection in New York, the late Prof. Merriam
saw a group of seventy-five vases from rock-cut tombs at Alexandria,
some with inscriptions.[204] They include hydriae of a dark red clay,
covered with a white slip on which are polychrome designs (Gorgoneia,
armour, etc.); others of unglazed salmon-coloured clay, painted with
wreaths, monsters, etc.; two-handled vases of black ware with ribbed
body and twisted handles, decorated with medallions in relief and
wreaths in white, like the vases of Gnatia (p. 488). The inscriptions
are laid on in ink with a reed, or incised, the former being in MS.
type; the method of dating is difficult to interpret, but they seem to
belong to the middle of the third century.

The Ionian settlements of _Naukratis_ and _Daphnae_ (Defenneh) in the
Delta have yielded very important results for the history of Greek
pottery, though differing in extent. The finds of pottery at Daphnae
may from the circumstances of discovery be dated entirely between 600
and 550 B.C.; and though only fragmentary, they are interesting not
only as showing the results of Egyptian influences, but for the points
of comparison they afford with the pottery of Ionic origin and the
Clazomenae sarcophagi. At Naukratis, on the other hand, the finds form
a complete series extending from the foundation of the city by
Milesians about 650 B.C., down to the end of the fifth century, at
which point importations of Greek pottery ceased. The earlier fabrics
are by far the most important, being almost entirely of local character
and distinguished by the white ground on which the Naucratite artist
painted his designs or figures in various colours. Among the fragments
of B.F. pottery were many with names of artists. These finds were all
made among the rubbish-heaps of temple-sites by the Egypt Exploration
Fund in 1884–86, with the exception of some subsequent work by the
British School in 1898–99. Most of the results are in the British
Museum: see also p. 345 ff.

In the second season (1885–86) at Naukratis were found several
interesting fragments of a B.F. white-ground ware, which from the
nature of the designs has been connected with _Kyrene_ (see Chapter
VIII., p. 341). But so far no specimens of this ware have been found in
the latter place, nor indeed anything earlier than the end of the fifth
century. It is to be hoped that the earlier cemeteries are yet to be
discovered. Mr. George Dennis and others, however, explored a
considerable tract of country in the Cyrenaica between 1856 and
1868,[205] and found many vases of late R.F. style, some of
considerable merit; also several Panathenaic amphorae of the fourth
century on which the old B.F. method of painting is preserved. These
were found on the site of _Teucheira_, but most of the vases came from
_Benghazi_, the ancient Euesperitis, more to the south-west, the
ancient name of which, Berenike, came from the queen of Ptolemy
Euergetes. Nearly all the vases found here are of the late fine R.F.
period, corresponding to those of the Crimea; they are, however, mostly
smaller and inferior in merit. The Panathenaic amphorae can be dated by
the names of Athenian archons which appear upon them: Nikokrates, 333
B.C.; Hegesias, 324 B.C.; Kephisodoros, 323 B.C.; Archippos, 321 B.C.;
and Theophrastos, 313 B.C. (see p. 390). They are of course
importations from Athens. Among the R.F. vases is one representing a
Persian king attacked by a lion; some have polychrome designs, in one
case combined with reliefs (B.M. G 12). Most of the Cyrenaica vases are
now in the British Museum and the Louvre.

                               IV. ITALY

With the mainland of Italy we include in our review the two islands of
Sicily and Sardinia. The remaining area in which Greek pottery has been
found on classical sites thus corresponds with the modern kingdom of
Italy. Beyond its borders there is only one site, that of _Massilia_
(Marseilles), which has produced Greek pottery. Vases of the primitive
Thera style (see p. 261) were found here,[206] betokening a system of
commerce between East and West in those times.

The vases found in Greece may be regarded as on the whole small in size
and few in number, when compared with those discovered in the ancient
cemeteries and on the sites of the old cities of Italy. These are
indeed so numerous that (within certain limits) they might in
themselves almost serve as a basis for the history of Greek
vase-painting. Roughly speaking, the vases found in Italy fall into two
geographical divisions.

[Illustration: FIG. 8. MAP OF ITALY.]

The first division comprises the vases discovered in Etruria, which are
found in every Etruscan city of importance, from Atria or Hadria at the
mouth of the Po to the very gates of Rome itself. In particular, the
tombs of Caere, Tarquinii, and above all Vulci, have yielded an immense
number of vases.

The second is formed by the vases found in the southern half of the
peninsula, including the territories of Campania, Lucania, and Apulia,
and the cities of Magna Graecia, such as Cumae, Locri and Tarentum. The
establishment of the potter’s art in these maritime cities at an early
stage of Greek history helped to infuse a certain degree of
civilisation into the regions of the interior, and its influence is to
be seen in the pottery of the semi-barbarous populations, such as the
Osco-Samnites and Iapygians. The chief sites for the discovery of vases
are: in Apulia and Calabria, Ruvo, Canosa, and Tarentum; in Lucania,
Anzi; in Campania, Capua and Nola.

We now proceed to describe in detail these sites and the discoveries of
which they have been the scene. It is obvious that it will be found
impossible to enumerate every spot in Italy where painted vases have
been found, but it is hoped that no place or site of interest has been
omitted. The order followed in describing these sites is a geographical
one from north to south, which on the whole will be found the most
convenient.

We accordingly begin with the northernmost spot to which the
exportation of Greek vases seems to have reached—namely, Atria or
_Hadria_, at the mouth of the Po. This place down to the time of
Pliny[207] continued to manufacture drinking-cups of fine quality,
celebrated for their durability, and painted vases have also been found
in its tombs. They were first excavated as early as the sixteenth
century; and in later excavations undertaken by the Austrian Government
fragments of Greek pottery were found at some depth below remains of
the Roman period.[208]

The cities of _Asti_, _Modena_ (Mutina), and _Pollenza_ (Pollentia)
were also celebrated in Pliny’s time for their cups, which he groups
with those of Arretium under the heading of “Samian” ware[209];
specimens of this ware have been found in the two latter places.[210]
Near Mantua a vase was discovered with the subject of Perseus and
Andromeda[211]; and others at Gavolda on the Mincio.[212] At Genoa a
fine R.F. krater was found in 1898.[213]

_Bologna_ has been the scene of discoveries sufficiently important to
demand a separate paragraph. These were made by Signor Zannoni, in
1869–76, in the cloister of the Certosa convent, and a fully
illustrated description was published by him at the conclusion of his
labours.[214] The finds include, besides remarkable bronzes of the
Villanova period of Italian civilisation (800–500 B.C.), a large number
of B.F. and R.F. vases covering the whole period of exportations from
Athens to Etruria (550–400 B.C.), and also some local imitations of
B.F. fabrics. All these are now in the Museo Civico at Bologna.

Turning now to the important district of ETRURIA, which has been so
prolific in discoveries of ancient vases, we come first to _Pisa_,
where, in the beginning of the last century, a potter’s establishment
was discovered. Since that time red-figured vases both of the severe
and fine styles have been found, including a hydria figured by
Inghirami.[215]

At _Volterra_ (Volaterrae) Jahn states that many painted vases have
been found[216]; but the contents of the local museum are limited to
inferior Etruscan pottery of the later period with yellow figures on
black ground or staring heads painted in silhouette. On the other hand
some of the plain black ware is remarkably good.[217]

_Arezzo_ (Arretium) enjoyed in Pliny’s time an even wider reputation
than the places already mentioned, for its pottery of all kinds, not
only cups[218]; its ware is also referred to by Martial and other
authors. These allusions have been fully borne out by the extensive
discoveries of potteries that have been made; the red glazed ware,
stamped with the potter’s name and with designs in relief, has been
found in large quantities, and fully justified the substitution of the
name Arretine for the old “Samian” in relation to the whole class. It
is more fully dealt with in the section on Roman pottery (Chapter
XXII.). Few Greek vases have been found here; but _Lucignano_ in the
neighbourhood is mentioned as a site where they have been
discovered.[219]

_Perugia_ was another important town of ancient Etruria, but does not
appear to have been a centre either for the manufacture or importation
of pottery. The museum, however, contains several good Greek vases with
mythological subjects, and some Etruscan imitations of R.F. vases have
also been found here.[220]

At _Chiusi_ (Clusium), on the other hand, some very important
discoveries have been made, including the magnificent krater of the
Florence Museum, known as the “François Vase,” after its
discoverer.[221] It was found in a tomb which had been already
pillaged, and was broken to pieces, but entire. Many vases of the B.F.
and R.F. periods have been found, some signed with artists’ names,
including those of Pamphaios and Anakles. On the whole, this site has
yielded more fine vases than any in Etruria, except Cervetri, and of
course Vulci; it is also noteworthy for the early Etruscan black wares,
of which there are many remarkable specimens in the Museum.[222] The
Casuccini collection, which was very representative of Chiusi finds,
has now been disposed of _en bloc_ to the Museum at Palermo.[223]

In the immediate neighbourhood is _Sarteano_, also remarkable for the
specimens of early black ware which it has yielded, but almost entirely
deficient in painted vases. At _Roselle_ (Rusellae) and _Orbetello_ in
the Maremma the finds of pottery have been of a comparatively
insignificant character, the vases of Orbetello being nearly all late
Etruscan fabrics, of rude forms, with coarse ill-drawn subjects. The
same remark applies to _Toscanella_, near Vulci, where Greek vases are
seldom found.

_Bolsena_ (Volsinii) is specially distinguished by a curious class of
late vases of coarse red ware with designs in relief, which show
evident signs of having been coated with a solution producing the
effect of silver.[224] They seem to be peculiar to this locality,
though Athenaeus[225] tells us that a similar practice was in vogue at
Naukratis. No other kinds of pottery have been found.

At _Orvieto_ excavations were first made in 1830, but without very
great results; the site was then neglected until the ’seventies, during
which years Signor Mancini’s excavations were so successful that a
local Museum has been established, which now contains many good
specimens of Greek vases, as well as Etruscan black wares.[226] At
_Viterbo_ various Greek vases, mostly black-figured, were found in the
early ’twenties, and later on a kylix by the master Euphronios came to
light.[227] _Bomarzo_ has yielded some good Greek vases, including
signed examples by Euphronios and Hieron.[228]

_Corneto_ is more famous for the splendid wall-paintings of its tombs
and for its coloured sarcophagi than for painted vases, but has
nevertheless yielded some vases of considerable interest, notably a
fine R.F. kylix with representation of the Olympian deities, signed by
Oltos and Euxitheos, the beautiful kylix representing the desertion of
Ariadne by Theseus,[229] and some specimens of Corinthian wares. Under
its ancient name of Tarquinii it was of course famous as the spot to
which Demaratos and his artist-companions were said to have fled from
Corinth. Excavations were first begun in 1825–27. Besides the
collection now in the public Museum,[230] there is a large one made by
Count Bruschi from excavations on his own lands, the majority of the
vases being of the B.F. period.[231] Not far distant are _Civita
Vecchia_, represented only by some remarkable early vases in the
British Museum,[232] Italian imitations of the Greek Dipylon ware, and
La Tolfa, where Etruscan, Corinthian, and Ionic B.F. vases have been
found.[233]

Few finds, at least of Greek pottery, have been made at _Civita
Castellana_, the ancient Falerii; but this town appears to have had a
special manufacture of its own in the fourth or third century B.C.,
like all other Etruscan fabrics an imitation of Greek vases, but with
certain strongly marked peculiarities of drawing and colouring. There
is a fine specimen in the British Museum.[234] These vases have only
been found in recent years. The British Museum also (among others)
possesses an interesting collection of local early black and red wares
from this site, including two large caldrons on open-work stands, with
Gryphons’ heads projecting. _Isola Farnese_, the ancient Veii, again,
is more celebrated for its local fabrics than for Greek importations.
Painted vases were found in 1838–39,[235] and in 1843 Campana
discovered a remarkable tomb containing vases of early character
without human figures, and early Italian wares. The archaic paintings
of this tomb are of special interest for comparison with the vases of
the period.[236]

Next to Vulci, which we have reserved for the last, by far the most
important discoveries in Etruria are those made in the tombs of
=Cervetri= (Caere), mostly of early fabrics. In 1836 the famous
Regulini-Galassi tomb came to light, a passage-like structure sixty
feet in length, with doorway of slabs sloping forward to form an arch;
but it contained few vases. In the same year was found a remarkable
vase of plain black ware, on which was engraved an early Greek
alphabet, with a sort of syllabic primer.[237] Another tomb contained a
series of slabs painted with archaic Etruscan figures in the style of
early B.F. vases, which are now in the British Museum. Others of
similar character are in the Louvre.[238] But though these large tombs
yielded little painted pottery, yet Cervetri has been the site of many
notable discoveries, chiefly of early B.F. vases illustrating various
developments of vase-painting. The most important is formed by the
series of hydriae named “Caeretan,” after the site, which are fully
discussed in Chapter VIII.; and among other finds we may note the
Amphiaraos krater at Berlin,[239] of Corinthian style. Excavations went
on for many years from 1831 onwards, and yielded also some interesting
later vases, including examples with the signatures of Nikosthenes,
Xenokles, Pamphaios, Euphronios,[240] and Charitaios, and the famous
vase representing the oil-merchant.[241] Jahn[242] gives a list of the
most important red-figured vases found here. At _Selva la Rocca_, near
Monteroni in the same neighbourhood, the Duchessa di Sermoneta
excavated a series of Greek painted vases of all periods. Other sites
in Etruria on which vases have been found are Doganella,[243] Ferento
near Viterbo,[244] Capannori,[245] Montepulciano,[246] Pitigliano,[247]
Poggia Sommavilla on the border of the Sabine territory,[248] S.
Filippo dei Neri, Tragliatella.[249]

But the discoveries made on all the other Etruscan sites combined are
surpassed, both in number and interest, by those of =Vulci=, a name
which eighty years since was scarcely known, but now represents to us
one of the most important cities of antiquity. The site is represented
by the modern Ponte della Badia, a district of about five miles in
circumference round the bridge over the stream Fiora, between the
estates of Canino and Montalto. The former estate lay on the left bank,
distinguished by a hill named Cucumella.

The discovery of painted vases here was brought about purely by
accident, about the year 1828. Some oxen in ploughing broke through
into an Etruscan tomb containing two broken vases, and thus the local
landlord, the Prince of Canino, was led to further researches. In the
course of four months he discovered about 2,000 objects in tombs on one
small plot of ground, and subsequently other explorers joined in
emulating his good fortune. The number of painted vases alone
discovered during the year 1829 is reckoned at over 3,000, according to
the elaborate report published by Gerhard in the _Annali_,[250]
describing and classifying the results. It would not be too much to
assert that nine-tenths of the painted vases that have been brought to
light in Etruria are from this site. Most of those now in the British
Museum are from Camposcala, on the Montalto estate; but many are from
the collections formed by Lucien Bonaparte, the Prince of Canino, who
continued to excavate intermittently for many years, though the numbers
of the finds materially diminished after the first great discovery.

In recent years the only important excavations on this site have been
those conducted by M. Gsell on the estate of Musignano, at the expense
of the proprietor, Prince Torlonia. The object was to exhaust the site
by sporadic diggings over the three principal areas of Ponte della
Badia, Polledrara, and Cucumella. In all 136 tombs were opened, ranging
from the period of “well-tombs” (about the ninth or eighth century
B.C.) down to the chamber-tombs of the early fifth century.[251]
Besides local pottery of all kinds they contained imported Greek
fabrics from the Geometrical ware down to the red-figure period. The
later included Corinthian vases of various kinds, a good “Tyrrhenian”
amphora, and one of the “affected” B.F. style, a cup signed by Tleson
and one in the style of Epiktetos, and Etruscan imitations of B.F.
fabrics.

M. Tyszkiewicz, the great collector, in his entertaining
_Souvenirs_,[252] tells a curious story of the fate of one of the vases
found in M. Gsell’s excavations:—

  “One day I received a visit from a country fellow, who said he had
  come from the neighbourhood of Canino, and brought with him a vase
  painted in the early Corinthian manner, the names of the figures
  being indicated by Greek inscriptions. The man declared he had
  discovered it in a tomb which had fallen in after heavy rains. The
  price asked was very reasonable, and the bargain was soon concluded.
  At that time M. van Branteghem ... was one of the most eager buyers
  of Greek vases, and he was so envious of my acquisition that I had
  real pleasure in giving it up to him. A little while after this,
  there called on me at my house a member of the French School in Rome,
  M. Gsell.... He began by asking me if I had not lately purchased a
  vase, which he closely described, and which proved to be the very one
  I had bought from the native of Canino. Now M. Gsell inspected so
  attentively the excavations under his care that it was impossible, he
  assured me, for the workmen to have stolen anything. All objects
  found were registered as soon as they were taken out of the tombs,
  and were locked up every evening in a warehouse. However, one day M.
  Gsell perceived that one had disappeared. He sent for the supposed
  thief (one of his superintendents), and by means of threats extracted
  a confession of the theft, and the name of the amateur to whom the
  vase had been sold. In conclusion, M. Gsell entreated me to let him
  have the vase.... Having parted with the vase, I felt the situation
  very embarrassing, but I told my interlocutor what had happened, and
  why I had handed the vase over to M. van Branteghem. The distress of
  M. Gsell on hearing this news touched me to such a degree that I
  ended by telling him that, knowing M. van Branteghem to be a
  gentleman, I would inform him he had become the owner of stolen
  goods, and throw myself on his mercy. The same day I wrote to the
  Belgian amateur and made a clean breast of the matter, and the vase
  was returned as quickly as possible. The vase was replaced in the
  museum of the Prince Torlonia at the Lungara.

  “Years passed away, when one morning I was told that a peasant, who
  was waiting in the hall, desired to show me an antique work of art.
  This was an event of daily occurrence—indeed, it happened several
  times every day, and usually I found that the object for whose sake I
  had been disturbed was either quite uninteresting or else a fraud.
  But this time—astonishing fact!—I was shown the very vase that I had
  restored to the French School, and had afterwards seen at the Lungara
  Museum. Once again it had been stolen!”

The tombs in which the vases were found were mostly small grottoes
hollowed in the tufa, and with a few exceptions only a few feet
underground. There was nothing remarkable in them except the vases, for
they were neither spacious nor decorated, nor finished with splendid
ornaments like the tombs of Corneto and of Magna Graecia. Some had
seats for holding the objects deposited with the dead; others pegs for
hanging the vases on the walls. The wonder was to find such fine
specimens of art in tombs so homely. These vases were of all styles and
epochs from early Corinthian of about the seventh century to the
Decadence. Besides these, an immense number of vases painted black
only, without any subject, and others of the black _bucchero_ ware,
were discovered in the various tombs, along with bronzes, ivories, and
other objects peculiarly Etruscan.[253]

This vast discovery naturally attracted the attention of Europe.
Notwithstanding the obvious fact of their possessing Greek
inscriptions, and the light thrown upon them by the researches of
Winckelmann, Lanzi, and other enlightened scholars, the Italian
antiquaries, fired with a mistaken patriotism, insisted on claiming all
the vases as Etruscan fabrics. The history of this error, long since
discredited, is briefly summarised in the Introductory chapter.[254]

                  *       *       *       *       *

Turning now to Southern Italy, _Latium_ need not detain us long. It is
true that Greek vases have from time to time been found at Rome, or at
any rate fragments, as in the recent excavations in the Forum[255]; but
few of these are of importance except as historical data. When Rome is
given as the provenance of a vase, it probably implies nothing more
than that it has been acquired from some dealer in that city. At Civita
Lavinia Lord Savile found some fragments of painted pottery of
different periods. Alba Longa is famous as the site whence the
hut-urns, elsewhere discussed, have been obtained; but on the whole
Rome and the cities of Latium seem to be quite barren in regard to
finds of pottery. With the three main divisions of the southern half of
Italy the case is quite different. It is true that there has been no
Vulci in these districts, and indeed that no scientific excavations
have taken place compared with those in Etruria; yet the yield of vases
from these parts is extraordinarily large. In the eighteenth century
the neighbourhood of Naples, Paestum, etc., was a favourite
hunting-ground with dilettanti, such as Sir William Hamilton, who
appear to have acquired their large collections chiefly from Campanian
tombs; but unfortunately they have left no record of the sites on which
these vases were found. In the Samnite district and north of the
Apennines pottery-finds are almost unknown; while the barbaric regions
of Bruttii and Calabria are only represented by a few late painted
vases of the rudest local fabrics.

It may be noted that as a general rule the Greek colonies on the coast,
which maintained from the earliest times a constant intercourse with
Greece, have yielded from their tombs a fair proportion of the older
Greek fabrics, whereas the inland cities are more remarkable for their
remains of the later Athenian and local wares, being of more recent
origin.

Beginning with Campania, we take first the famous colony of _Cumae_,
the most ancient in Magna Graecia, which was founded by the Chalcidians
of Kyme in Aeolis at an unknown date, but not later than the eighth
century. Vases of all periods have been found here, though not in great
numbers. The earliest belong to the infancy of the colony, and include
the famous lekythos of Tataie found in 1843, and now in the British
Museum.[256] It bears an inscription in the Chalcidian alphabet. But
the majority of the finds belong to the period when there appears to
have been a flourishing local fabric, about the third century B.C. They
are the most typical representatives of the Campanian style, and may be
studied to best advantage in the Raccolta Cumana of the Naples Museum,
where they are collected together.[257] Many of these were found in
1842. Cumae was famous for its pottery even in Roman times,[258] and
specimens of Roman ware with reliefs have been found here, as also at
the neighbouring Puteoli (Chapter XXII.)

Next in importance for the history of local fabrics are the vases found
at _S. Agata dei Goti_, the ancient Saticula, which can also claim a
manufacture of its own.[259] They are for the most part bell-shaped
kraters, and were chiefly excavated at the end of the eighteenth
century. Signed vases by the Paestum masters Assteas and Python (see
below) came from this site. The vases of _Abella_ form another class of
Campanian ware, but of a degenerate and late type, mostly hydriae of
very pale clay. Other sites which have yielded Campanian vases are:
Naples (Neapolis), Telese, Teano, Acerra, Sessa, and Nuceria Alfaterna
(Nocera).[260]

_Capua_, on the other hand, does not appear to have had any special
fabric of its own, although the finds of all periods are as numerous as
from any site in Southern Italy except Ruvo and Nola. Among the earlier
specimens may be mentioned the inscribed Corinthian krater in the
British Museum (B 37) from the Hamilton collection (Plate XXI.). The
red-figured vases include cups signed by Euergides, Epiktetos, and
Pistoxenos. The vases of the Decadence have, as indicated, no
distinctive features of their own. Most of the late red-figured vases
of fancy shapes (such as rhyta) in the British Museum are from this
site, whence they passed into the hands of Castellani. The black vases
with gilded ornamentation, of which the British Museum possesses some
fine specimens, are also characteristic of Capua. A large number of the
vases obtained by Sir William Temple are from this site, as is also one
of the later Panathenaic amphorae.[261]

At _Calvi_ (Cales) Greek painted vases are almost unrepresented,[262]
but this site is distinguished as the origin of two late varieties of
fictile ware. One is formed by the Calene phialae (p. 502), or bowls of
black ware with interior designs in relief, sometimes signed with the
names of local potters; the other consists of large vases highly
ornamented with terracotta figurines attached in different places, or
else modelled in the form of female figures or heads. Strictly
speaking, the latter must be classed under the heading of terracottas
(see p. 119).

Lastly, we have to speak of _Nola_, which, like Capua, was always a
city of considerable importance, and is represented by a large series
of vases of all periods.[263] Here again we can detect no signs of a
special local fabric, though for a long time the so-called “Nolan”
amphorae of the red-figured period were thought to have been made on
the spot, so frequently have they been found. The name is still
retained as convenient for describing this particular form of amphora
(see p. 162), with its exquisite black varnish, graceful outlines, and
simple yet effective decoration; but it is, of course, quite
conventional. The vases are purely Attic (some are signed by Athenian
artists), and it can only be supposed that they found especial favour
in the Nolan market. Corinthian and Attic black-figured vases occur in
large numbers, and both here and at Capua there seems to have been a
tendency to imitate the exported Athenian wares. Thus we find not only
vases with black figures on buff ground on which the drawing is
obviously free and developed, but also imitations of the “Nolan”
amphorae, both classes dating from about the fourth century B.C.

At _Sorrento_ and the neighbouring Vico Equense a few vases of
different periods have been found, including a fine R.F. krater signed
by Polygnotos, which was discovered in 1893, and is now in the British
Museum.[264] Salerno is also mentioned as a site where Greek vases have
come to light.

The famous city of _Paestum_ lay actually within the borders of
Lucania, but all its relations were with Campania, and it may
practically be regarded as a Campanian city. Little has been found here
except local fourth- and third-century fabrics, but these are for the
most part so remarkable that they have established the existence of a
school of vase-painting at Paestum quite distinct from and earlier than
the fabrics of the three districts of Southern Italy.[265] Nearly all
the vases found here (including three signed by the master Assteas)
have the distinguishing characteristics of this class. They are mostly
to be seen in the Naples Museum; a fuller account of them is given in
Chapter XI.

Among the sites in Lucania on which vases have been found,[266] the
most important is _Anzi_, the ancient Anxia, which appears to have been
the chief centre for the manufacture of the Lucanian vases. Earlier
examples of Greek red-figured vases have also come from this site, but
the majority are of the Lucanian class.[267] Provenances in this
district are, however, always doubtful, and in many cases nothing more
definite than “Basilicata” can be ascertained. But discoveries on the
following sites seem to be well attested: Armento,[268] Eboli,[269]
Missanello, Grumento, Potenza,[270] Pomarico, and Pisticci.[271] The
British Museum collection includes a fine B.F. krater (B 360) from
Armento, the famous vase with the Doloneia (F 157 = Fig. 130.) from
Pisticci, several from Anzi, and a few from Pomarico. In the Naples
Museum are vases from Pomarico, Pisticci, and elsewhere (chiefly in the
Santangelo collection), while the Koller collection, now in the Berlin
Museum, contains many from Castelluccio, S. Arcangelo, and other sites.
But none of these finds compare in any sense with those of Apulia and
Campania. There were no ancient cities of special importance in this
region, and hence no large cemeteries, while the local fabric was
probably not of long duration.

In Apulia the site above all others important is that of _Ruvo_, which
was no doubt the chief centre of the local pottery-manufactures, and
has yielded a great majority of the vases known as “Apulian,” as well
as many of earlier style. Excavations began here in the eighteenth
century, but it was not until 1828 that they were undertaken on any
large scale. Vases are still found from time to time at the present
day, and one of the largest private collections still existing, that of
Signor Jatta, is extraordinarily rich in the vases of Apulian style
collected by this gentleman and preserved on the spot. It is curious
that Ruvo (Rubi) had no special importance in antiquity; it may,
however, be worth noting that remains of a pottery with furnaces, etc.,
have come to light.[272] The Apulian vases from Ruvo have no special
characteristics which distinguish them from the other Apulian fabrics.

It would be futile to attempt a detailed description of the finds at
Ruvo,[273] which include such a large proportion of the magnificent
Apulian vases covered with paintings of an elaborate nature. Of earlier
specimens, an isolated Corinthian vase, two Panathenaic amphorae, and
sundry other B.F. vases are known, as also occasional R.F. vases, but
these are almost exceptions. Among the most famous Apulian vases are
those representing the Death of Talos, the Death of Archemoros,
preparations for a Satyric Drama, and so on.[274]

More important in antiquity, though less productive in vases, is
_Canosa_, the ancient Canusium, where a set of fine vases was first
discovered in 1813 and published by Millin. Among the best of these is
the great Dareios vase at Naples (see Chapter XIV. _ad fin._). Nearly
all are of the Apulian class, with preferences for certain forms and
details (such as the use of purple) not appearing at Ruvo, and a
typical local product is a kind of _prochoös_ or tall jug.[275] Canosa
was also a centre for the large terracotta vases which have been also
found at Calvi (see p. 119).

At _Bari_ vases have been found from time to time, and there is a fair
collection in the local museum[276]; they include the famous
Poniatowski vase with Triptolemos’ setting-out, now in the Vatican, and
the krater in the British Museum (F 269) with the burlesque combat of
Ares and Hephaistos over Hera. _Ceglie_ has chiefly supplied the Berlin
Museum with its Apulian specimens (from the Koller collection), others
passing into a private collection at Naples. They are mostly of the
later over-elaborated style.

_Altemura_ has supplied a few, but chiefly fine, vases, including the
R.F. krater with the birth of Pandora (Brit. Mus. E 467) and the
magnificent vase representing the Under-world found in 1847 and now in
Naples. Other finds have been made at _Polignano_, _Putignano_, and
_Fasano_ (Gnatia), which last site is interesting as the probable
centre of a late fabric. Most of the vases found here have figures or
patterns painted in opaque white and purple on the black glaze, and
represent the latest stage of vase-painting in Southern Italy.[277]
They are found almost exclusively on this site. It is also represented
by some late R.F. vases with polychrome decoration.

In the region covered by the “heel” of Italy the most important site,
as also the most important city in ancient times, is _Taranto_ or
Tarentum. Chiefly on the authority of M. Lenormant,[278] this city was
for a long time regarded as the centre of many South Italian fabrics,
including the vases with burlesque scenes (f??a?e?), those of Paestum,
the Fasano ware, and, in fact, all Apulian fabrics. But the extensive
excavations that have taken place at Tarentum of late years have shown
that Lenormant and those who followed him were quite misled. Few
Apulian vases have come to light, the Paestum fabric is unrepresented,
and although the f??a?e? of Tarentum were no doubt specially famous in
antiquity, there is no authority for connecting this class of vases
with them to the exclusion of other sites. Vases, in fact, are
extremely rare at Tarentum, which made a much greater speciality of
terracottas, especially of a votive kind; a few B.F. and R.F. specimens
are known,[279] including the remarkable fragment of a R.F. krater in
the British Museum (E 494), and a fine krater with an Amazonomachia
(Bibl. Nat. 421).

Vases from _Metapontum_ also are few and far between; the British
Museum possesses a specimen with figures in relief on black ground; and
finds are also reported from _Lecce_, _Brindisi_, and _Oria_.[280] Many
examples of local fabrics, described in Chapter XVIII., have been found
in this district, and specimens are preserved in the museums at Bari,
Lecce, and elsewhere. Lastly we have to speak of the finds made at
_Locri_ on the east side of the “toe” of Italy, the only important site
in that district which has yielded Greek vases. Many of these are white
lekythi with figures in outline and polychrome, resembling the
well-known Athenian fabrics. They were originally (like those of Gela)
thought to be local products, but it is more likely that they were made
at Athens and imported, the Locrians having a particular preference for
these vases, as the people of Nola had for the slim amphorae. Some of
the B.F. and R.F. vases found here are of a very fair order of
merit.[281]

=Sicily=, so celebrated for its magnificent works of art, has yielded a
considerable number of painted vases of all periods. The cities of the
southern coast have produced the greatest number, especially Syracuse,
Gela (Terranuova), and Agrigentum (Girgenti). Many have also come from
the cemeteries of Acrae, Leontini, and Megara Hyblaea. Palermo,
Messina, and Catania have produced isolated examples. The richest finds
have been in the recently excavated cemeteries of _Syracuse_. The
discoveries of early vases and fragments made here by Dr. Orsi are of
the utmost importance, and include quantities of specimens of Mycenaean
and “Proto-Corinthian” wares.[282]

At _Terranuova_ or Gela, one of the earliest settlements of the island,
vases with black and with red figures were found as long ago as the
eighteenth century,[283] and in 1792 a pottery with furnaces and vases
was discovered in the neighbourhood.[284] Of late years vases with
black and red figures, some of the latter being of the finest style,
have been discovered in large numbers, as well as white lekythi,
probably imported from Athens. Of these finds we have already given
some description (p. 37). In 1862 Mr. George Dennis found a series of
fine R.F. lekythi of the “severe” period, together with B.F. vases and
archaic terracottas, now in the British Museum; and these have been
fully rivalled by Mr. Arthur Evans’ discoveries in later years. The
site has also yielded vases of a primitive character, imitating early
Greek wares. Gela was always noted for its potteries, as the ceramic
decorations of the Geloan Treasury at Olympia show (p. 100); many of
the vases have characteristic Sicilian subjects, and there was
undoubtedly a considerable local fabric.

Of the vases found at _Girgenti_ (Agrigentum) the most noteworthy is
the beautiful lebes now in the British Museum,[285] of the finest R.F.
style, described as “one of the finest specimens of Greek ceramography
that has come down to us, absolutely unsurpassed in its combination of
artistic merit and mythological interest.” It was found in 1830, and
belonged to the poet Samuel Rogers; the subject is the combat of
Theseus with the Amazons. Other B.F. and R.F. vases of fine style have
come from this site,[286] as well as a series of moulds for vases with
reliefs, of the Hellenistic period.[287] Fine vases are said to have
been found at _Kamarina_,[288] a few with red figures at _Himera_, and
some archaic lekythi at _Selinus_.[289] From _Lentini_ Jahn records
polychrome and R.F. vases, the latter of the “strong” and later
periods.[290] At _Palazzolo_ (Acrae) B.F. and R.F. vases have been
found, including a B.F. kotyle in the British Museum (B 79),
representing Dionysos in a car formed like a ship. At _Centorbi_
(Centuripae) almost the only find of note was a conical cover of a
large bowl ornamented with encaustic paintings, the colours having been
prepared with wax; parts of two bowls were also found decorated with
designs in relief and gilt, of scrolls, small Cupids, and heads of
Medusa.[291] Other sites that may be mentioned are: Hybla Heraea
(Ragusa),[292] Catania, Alicata,[293] Aderno[294] at the foot of Etna,
and Monte Saraceno.[295]

At Tharros, in _Sardinia_, extensive excavations were made in 1856, and
a long series of tombs found containing Phoenician objects in
porcelain, engraved scarabs, terracotta figures, and other objects, but
little painted Greek pottery of any importance.[296] An interesting
krater of late date, with the head of the Satyr Akratos, from the
island of _Lipari_ is now in the collection of Mr. J. Stevenson at
Glasgow[297]; and in _Ischia_ was found a krater with the subject of
the infant Dionysos confided to the Nymphs.[298] In the public museum
of _Malta_ some Greek vases are to be seen,[299] but it is not known
whether they were actually found there.

We have now completed the circuit of the ancient world, so far as finds
of Greek pottery are concerned, as with the exception of Marseilles,
already alluded to none can be traced in Spain or Central Europe.

-----

Footnote 48:

  Curiously enough, the relative proportions of Greek and Oriental
  civilisation in Asia Minor are almost exactly the same at the present
  day as in the sixth century B.C. The Greeks are mostly to be found in
  towns like Smyrna, and the adjoining islands, while the central part
  of the country is almost entirely Turkish.

Footnote 49:

  See for references to descriptions of tombs Hermann, _Lehrbuch d.
  Antiq._ iv. (1882), p. 377.

Footnote 50:

  Room K, Cases 69–72.

Footnote 51:

  For specimens of typical Athenian tombs see Stackelberg, _Gräber der
  Hellenen_, pl. 7. Fig. 1. gives a reproduction of a cist full of
  vases from _ibid._ pl. 8. For an admirable description of the tombs
  of the Dipylon, see _Ath. Mitth._ 1893, p. 74 ff.

Footnote 52:

  _Compte-Rendu_, Atlas, 1859, pls. 5–6; Macpherson, _Antiqs. of
  Kertch_, _passim_.

Footnote 53:

  _Arch. Zeit._ 1850, p. 209, pl. 19.

Footnote 54:

  _Journ. Hell. Stud._ vi. p. 237.

Footnote 55:

  See for illustrations of tombs at Agia Paraskevi, near Nicosia, _Ath.
  Mitth._ 1886, xi. p. 209 ff., and Suppl. pl. 2, from which Fig. 2. is
  taken.

Footnote 56:

  For specimens of Cypriote tombs of all periods the reader is referred
  to Cesnola’s _Cyprus; Brit. Mus. Excavations in Cyprus_, 1893–96;
  _Journ. Hell. Stud._ ix. p. 264 (Paphos) and xi. p.19 ff. (Poli).

Footnote 57:

  _Trans. Roy. Soc. Lit._ 2nd Ser. ix. (1870), p. 162.

Footnote 58:

  Gardner, _Cat. of Vases in Ashmol. Mus._ p. vii.

Footnote 59:

  Cavallari in _Bull. della Comm. di Antich. in Sicil._ 1872, v. p. 10,
  pl. 3.

Footnote 60:

  Vol. ii. p. 57, vignette. Models of this tomb exist in cork, and
  specimens may be seen in the Winchester College Museum and Eton
  School Library.

Footnote 61:

  _Scavi di Certosa_, 1875, text and plates.

Footnote 62:

  For tombs at Ruvo see Jatta, _Cat. del Museo_, p. 53 ff.

Footnote 63:

  Reference may also be made to Martha, _L'Art Étrusque_, p. 183 ff.

Footnote 64:

  For an example in the B.M. see E 811 in the Fourth Vase Room, Cases
  6–7. A plain jar of late date, from Halikarnassos, full of calcined
  bones, is in the Terracotta Room of the B.M., Case 20.

Footnote 65:

  See also Rathgen, _Konservirung von Altertumsfunden_, p. 67.

Footnote 66:

  Westropp, _Epochs of Painted Vases_, p. 17.

Footnote 67:

  Inghirami, _Vasi Fittili_, i. pl. 13; a false vase is also published
  in Passeri, 300, and others in D'Hancarville, ii. 71, 84. The worst
  specimen is perhaps that engraved by Millin, _Peintures_, ii, pls.
  54–5 (reproduced in Reinach’s edition), which yet for a long time
  found general acceptance. As a curiosity and a warning it deserves
  perpetuation.

Footnote 68:

  Eng. transl. p. 180 ff.

Footnote 69:

  Curiously enough there was in M. Tyszkiewicz’s own collection a
  white-ground cup with the subject of Phrixos (_Sale Cat._ pl. 35),
  which is certainly open to suspicion·

Footnote 70:

  _Gaz. Arch._ 1875, pl. 14.

Footnote 71:

  Reinach, ii. 62 (in Louvre).

Footnote 72:

  B.M. E 458.

Footnote 73:

  Munich 404.

Footnote 74:

  B.M. E 468.

Footnote 75:

  B.M. F 331.

Footnote 76:

  B.M. B 130.

Footnote 77:

  See Reinach, _Répertoire_, ii. p. 277.

Footnote 78:

  Millin-Reinach, i. pl. 49; now at Deepdene (?).

Footnote 79:

  This has been especially the case of late years, as in the sale of M.
  van Branteghem’s collection in 1892, when a small kylix signed by
  Sotades cost as much as £400, and two others slightly less.

Footnote 80:

  Some account of the prices paid for vases will be found in De Witte’s
  _Description des Antiquités et Objets d’Art qui composent le cabinet
  de feu M. le Chev. E. Durand_, Paris, 1836; and in the same author’s
  _Description d’une collection de vases peints et bronzes antiques
  provenant des fouilles de l’Étrurie_, Paris, 1837.

Footnote 81:

  His Introduction to the Munich Vase Catalogue gives a good account of
  finds of vases in Greece up to that time (1854); see p. xxi. ff.

Footnote 82:

  Cf. Athenaeus, i. 28 C; xi. 484 F, and 480 C.

Footnote 83:

  B 130. See _Cat._ vol. ii. for list of publications of this vase.

Footnote 84:

  _Gräber der Hellenen._ He also gives some description of the tombs in
  which they were found, and the nature of their contents (see above,
  p. 33).

Footnote 85:

  Good summaries of these discoveries will be found in the _Arch.
  Anzeiger_, 1893, p. 13 ff., and _Berliner Philol. Wochenschr._ 1895,
  p. 59.

Footnote 86:

  _E.g._ Bibl. Nat. 865 _bis_; ?f. ???. 1885, pls. 8–9; 1888, pl. 12;
  1898, pls. 2–5; 1901, pl. 1.

Footnote 87:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1893, p. 46 ff.: see also Bibl. Nat. 496 _bis_, 506.

Footnote 88:

  Bibl. Nat. 417 is from the neighbouring Munychia.

Footnote 89:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1896, p. 385 ff.; and see below, p. 278.

Footnote 90:

  Berlin 56 = _Jahrbuch_, 1887, pl. 5.

Footnote 91:

  A fine R.F. and polychrome kylix = _Mon. dell’ Inst._ x. 37 _a_ =
  Reinach, _Répertoire_, i. p. 207; also Athens 688 = Reinach, i. 164.

Footnote 92:

  Berlin 2030; Athens 1167.

Footnote 93:

  Berlin 2493, 2690; _Arch. Zeit._ 1880, pl. 16 = Reinach, i. p. 428.

Footnote 94:

  Berlin 2373.

Footnote 95:

  ?f. ???. 1895, pl. 11 (Mycenaean).

Footnote 96:

  Berlin 1887–89.

Footnote 97:

  Athens 1241; _Amer. Journ. of Arch._ 1903, p. 320.

Footnote 98:

  See for the Vourva vases Athens 592 ff.; _Ath. Mitth._ 1890, p. 318
  ff.; _Jahrbuch_, 1903, p. 124 ff.; and p. 299 below.

Footnote 99:

  See Dodwell, _Tour_, ii. p. 180. Stephanus of Byzantium speaks of the
  pottery of Megara (_s.v._) See also Athens 1858; Petersburg 1563 _a_.

Footnote 100:

  viii. p. 381: cf. p. 134.

Footnote 101:

  Ross, _Arch. Aufs._ ii. p. 344; Bibl. Nat. 101: see also Jahn’s
  _Einleitung_, p. xxv.

Footnote 102:

  _Ibid._ i. p. 57.

Footnote 103:

  See p. 316.

Footnote 104:

  _E.g._ Bibl. Nat. 94, 313, 1179.

Footnote 105:

  See generally Furtwaengler and Loeschcke, _Myken. Vasen_, p. 50; for
  notices of Mycenaean fragments by early travellers, Dodwell, _Tour_,
  ii. p. 237, and Burgon in _Trans. Roy. Soc. Lit._ 2nd Ser. ii.
  (1847), p. 258 ff., with plate opposite p. 296.

Footnote 106:

  Fig. 88, p. 297.

Footnote 107:

  _Ibid._ pls. 15, 21, p. 45; ?f. ???. 1895, pl. 11.

Footnote 108:

  Furtwaengler and Loeschcke, p. 47.

Footnote 109:

  _Arch. Zeit._ 1859, pl. 125 = Reinach, i. 389: see also _Bull. dell’
  Inst._ 1832, p. 62; _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1847, p. 250.

Footnote 110:

  _Cat._ 1615, 1901, 1931–32: see also _Branteghem Sale Cat._ 94.

Footnote 111:

  _Cat._ 1974.

Footnote 112:

  Bibl. Nat. 166; _Class. Review_, 1891, p. 73; ?f. ???. 1892, pl. 4.

Footnote 113:

  See _Ergebnisse_, iv. p. 198 ff.

Footnote 114:

  See p. 391.

Footnote 115:

  See p. 451.

Footnote 116:

  See Kekulé, _Thonfiguren aus Tanagra_, p. 13.

Footnote 117:

  Isolated vase-finds from Tanagra are the early B.F. tripod, Berlin
  1727, and the fine R.F. krater, Athens 1259.

Footnote 118:

  _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ xix. p. 177.

Footnote 119:

  Cf. Athens 678, 809, 1156, 1158.

Footnote 120:

  Vases from Lamia are Nos. 1621 and 1984; from Lokris, 1354, 1434;
  from Phokis, 1177, 1181.

Footnote 121:

  _Branteghem Sale Cat._ No. 96.

Footnote 122:

  _Ibid._ No. 43; Berlin 2938.

Footnote 123:

  B.M. E 719, an alabastron formerly in the Branteghem collection.

Footnote 124:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1889, p. 151: see below, p. 217. A late B.F. vase of
  “Kabeirion” style.

Footnote 125:

  Fragments from Delphi are recorded in _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1841, p. 10;
  Jahn, _Vasens. zu München_, p. xxv; _Morgenblatt_, 1835, p. 698.

Footnote 126:

  Furtwaengler and Loeschcke, p. 43.

Footnote 127:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1901, p. 237.

Footnote 128:

  For Kephallenia see _J.H.S._ xxiv. p. 126.

Footnote 129:

  _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1847, p. 247, note 5; Mustoxidi, _Delle cose
  Corciresi_, i. p. 271; B.M. A 1670.

Footnote 130:

  A beautiful polychrome lekythos in the B.M. (D 70 = Plate LV.) is
  from this island, on the authority of Raoul-Rochette (_Peint. Antiq._
  p. 415); but see Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ p. 42, where it is
  attributed to Aegina.

Footnote 131:

  Perrot, _Hist. de l’Art_, vii. pp. 51, 208.

Footnote 132:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1897, p. 259.

Footnote 133:

  Stackelberg, pl. 48; _Magazin Encycl._ 1811, ii. p. 140; and see note
  130.

Footnote 134:

  See also Brongniart, _Mus. Céram._ pl. 13, 11, and _Traité_, i. p.
  576; _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1829, p. 113, 1830, p. 129; _Ann. dell’
  Inst._ 1837, p. 135, 1842, p. 103, 1847, p. 250; and numerous vases
  in the Bibl. Nat. (see p. 689 of Catalogue).

Footnote 135:

  _J.H.S._ xvii. p. 77; xviii. p. 281 ff.

Footnote 136:

  B.M. B 8; Berlin 1682 = Reinach, i. 441; Reinach, i. 118, 2; B.M. E
  508; Gerhard, _A.V.B._ iii. 238 = Reinach, ii. 120 (in Berlin),
  signed by Ergotimos.

Footnote 137:

  Pallat in _Ath. Mitth._ 1897, p. 265.

Footnote 138:

  _Berl. Phil. Woch._ 1901, pp. 1001, 1436.

Footnote 139:

  See Hesychius, _s.v._ ???; he adds, ???e? d? ?????a?, ?pe?d? ??e?
  ?st?a?a p???? ?st?.

Footnote 140:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1903, p. 124 ff.; ?f. ???. 1901, pls. 9–12, p. 173 ff.

Footnote 141:

  Athens 618 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1963, fig. 2098.

Footnote 142:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1886, p. 16.

Footnote 143:

  Furtwaengler and Loeschcke, p. 33.

Footnote 144:

  Ross, _Reisen_, iii. p. 25.

Footnote 145:

  Athens 1861.

Footnote 146:

  _Class. Review_, 1899, p. 468.

Footnote 147:

  E 732: see p. 357 and Fig. III.

Footnote 148:

  Furtwaengler and Reichhold, _Gr. Vasenmalerei_, p. 220.

Footnote 149:

  Furtwaengler and Loeschcke, p. 21. For Geometrical, see Brongniart
  and Riocreux, _Mus. de Sèvres_, pl. 13, figs. 4, 13, 15, 16.

Footnote 150:

  _Reisen_, i. p. 66; iii. p. 27. See also Berlin 3901, 4088;
  Brongniart, _Traité_, i. p. 577; Bibl. Nat. 19, 21, 22. The Sèvres
  vases mentioned by Brongniart were found about thirty feet below the
  volcanic deposits.

Footnote 151:

  See _Ath. Mitth._ 1903, p. 1 ff.; H. von Gaertringen, _Thera_, vol.
  ii.

Footnote 152:

  See Jahn, _Vasens. zu München_, p. xxvi; Berlin 1886; _Rhein. Mus._
  1843, p. 435; Boettiger, _Vasengem._ i. p. 29.

Footnote 153:

  These are fully described and illustrated in a volume issued by the
  Hellenic Society (1904).

Footnote 154:

  _Op. cit._ iii. p. 15 ff.

Footnote 155:

  _J.H.S._ xxii. p. 46 ff.

Footnote 156:

  _Mon. Grecs_, 1875, pls. 1–2.

Footnote 157:

  _Rhein. Mus._ 1843. p. 435; Bibl. Nat. 873 (Chios); for Tenedos as a
  pottery centre see Dio Chrys. _Orat._ 42, 5; Plutarch, _Vit. aer.
  alien._ 2.

Footnote 158:

  For ancient references to Samian ware see Chapter XXII., where the
  subject is discussed in detail.

Footnote 159:

  _Aus ion. u. ital. Nekrop._ (1898); he also found Cyrenaic,
  Corinthian, and Attic pottery (p. 125 ff.). See below, p. 336.

Footnote 160:

  See also _Arch. Zeit._ 1848, p. 280.

Footnote 161:

  See Ross, _Reisen_, iv. p. 44.

Footnote 162:

  Brongniart, _Traité_, i. p. 581 (plain wares only).

Footnote 163:

  _J.H.S._ viii. p. 446. pl. 83.

Footnote 164:

  Furtwaengler and Loeschcke, p. 33.

Footnote 165:

  See Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ i. p. 130 ff.

Footnote 166:

  See on the Geometrical pottery Pottier, _op. cit._ p. 136. It is
  probably imported, although Dümmler (_Jahrbuch_, 1891, p. 268) thinks
  otherwise.

Footnote 167:

  There is at least one late R.F. vase from Crete in the National
  Museum at Athens (_Cat._ 1851, 1860, 1921). See for other instances
  of earlier finds, below, p. 269; Furtwaengler and Loeschcke, p. 22;
  Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ i. p. 176.

Footnote 168:

  _Proc. Soc. Antiqs._ 2nd Ser. xv. (1895), p. 351 ff.

Footnote 169:

  See _J.H.S._ xxiii. p. 157 ff. for an estimate of the Knossos
  pottery; also p. 265 below.

Footnote 170:

  _British School Annual_, 1899–1900, p. 94 ff.; _J.H.S._ xxi. p. 78 ff.

Footnote 171:

  _Ibid._ 1900–01, p. 121 ff.; _J.H.S._ xxiii. p. 248 ff.

Footnote 172:

  _Ibid._ 1901–2, p. 289 ff.; 1902–3, p. 297.

Footnote 173:

  _Rendiconti dell’ Accad. dei Lincei_, 1900, p. 631.

Footnote 174:

  _American Journ. of Arch._ 1901, p. 371 ff., 302, 128; _British
  School Annual_, 1901–02, p. 235 (Praesos).

Footnote 175:

  Nos. 98 and 99 in the collection of M. van Branteghem were two fine
  R.F. “aryballi” from Apollonia in Thrace.

Footnote 176:

  The reader who wishes to gain a comprehensive idea of these vases is
  referred to the plates of the Atlas to Stephani’s _Compte-Rendu de la
  Comm. imp. arch. de St.-Pétersbourg_ (1861–83) = Reinach,
  _Répertoire_, i. p. 1 ff.

Footnote 177:

  See also Jahn, _Vasens. zu München_, p. xxvii.

Footnote 178:

  _Compte-Rendu_, 1870–71, pl. 4 = Reinach, i. 34.

Footnote 179:

  See an interesting article in _Anzeiger_, 1900, p. 151, on the
  relations of the Black Sea colonies to Greece, especially in regard
  to pottery.

Footnote 180:

  See Dörpfeld, _Troja und Ilion_, i. p. 304 ff.

Footnote 181:

  So Jahn, _Vasens_. p. xxvii, but from the illustration given in
  Choiseul-Gouffier’s _Voyage pittoresque_, pt. 2, pl. 30, this seems
  doubtful.

Footnote 182:

  Jahn, _Vasens_. p. xxvii.

Footnote 183:

  _Monuments Piot_, x. pls. 6–7.

Footnote 184:

  The style resembled that of B 80 in the Brit. Mus.

Footnote 185:

  See Perrot, _Hist. de l’Art_, vi. pp. 929, 931. The British Museum
  possesses a similar one from Kalymnos (p. 273).

Footnote 186:

  _Ion. u. ital. Nekrop._ pp. 86–7.

Footnote 187:

  _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 274; Pottier and Reinach, _Nécropole de Myrina_,
  pp. 221, 499; _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1884, p. 509; _Ath. Mitth._
  1887, p. 228.

Footnote 188:

  _Röm. Mitth._ 1888, pl. 6; now in Brit. Mus.

Footnote 189:

  See generally Chapter VIII.

Footnote 190:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1898, pl. 6, p. 38 ff.

Footnote 191:

  Athen. xi. 481 A. See also _Ath. Mitth._ 1900, p. 94.

Footnote 192:

  _Trans. Roy. Soc. Lit._ 2nd Ser. ii. (1847), p. 258, and plate, fig.
  D.

Footnote 193:

  Chantre, _Recherches archéol._ pls. 8–14; _J.H.S._ xix. p. 37 ff.

Footnote 194:

  _Ath. Mitth._ xii. (1887), pp. 226, 376.

Footnote 195:

  Cf. Pliny, _H.N._ xxxv. 161; Athenaeus, i. 28 D; Lucian, _Lexiph._ 7.
  For pottery from Datcha, near Knidos, see _Rev. Arch._ xxv. (1894),
  p. 27.

Footnote 196:

  Jahn, p. xxvii.

Footnote 197:

  _Comptes-Rendus de l’Acad. des Inscr._ Aug. 1902, p. 428 ff.; 1903,
  p. 216.

Footnote 198:

  _Catalogue of Cyprus Museum_, Oxford, 1899.

Footnote 199:

  See Hermann, _Gräberfeld von Marion_ (1888); _J.H.S._ xi. p. 41 ff.,
  xii. p. 315; _Branteghem Sale Cat._ Nos. 14–18, 28–30.

Footnote 200:

  _J.H.S._ xi. p. 273.

Footnote 201:

  _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, iv. F 510–12.

Footnote 202:

  Petrie, _Hawara_, pl. 16, figs. 1–4.

Footnote 203:

  It was presented to the British Museum by Sir E. Codrington in 1830.
  Similar painted vases were found in Roman tombs at Curium, Cyprus
  (_Excavations in Cyprus_, p. 78).

Footnote 204:

  _Amer. Journ. of Arch._ 1885, p. 18.

Footnote 205:

  See _Trans. Roy. Soc. of Lit._ 2nd Ser. ix. p. 165 ff., and _Arch.
  Zeit._ 1846, p. 216; also p. 36 above.

Footnote 206:

  _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1884, pl. 13; Froehner, _Ant. du Mus. de
  Marseilles_, 1928–30.

Footnote 207:

  _H.N._ xxxv. 161.

Footnote 208:

  See Jahn, _Vasens. zu München_, p. lxxxiv; _Arch. Zeit._ 1850, pl. 18
  = Reinach, i. 372; Micali, _Mon. Ined._ pl. 45, p. 279; and Schöne,
  _Mus. Bocchi_, 1878.

Footnote 209:

  _H.N._ xxxv. 160.

Footnote 210:

  See Chapter XXII., and Brongniart, _Traité_, i. p. 583.

Footnote 211:

  _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1848, p. 62.

Footnote 212:

  _Ibid._ 1847, p. 17.

Footnote 213:

  _Class. Review_, 1899, p. 329; _Röm. Mitth._ 1899, pl. 7.

Footnote 214:

  _Scavi della Certosa di Bologna_, text and plates, 1876: see also
  _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1872, pp. 12 ff., 76 ff., 108 ff.

Footnote 215:

  See _Vasi Fitt._ iv. pl. 355, p. 82; _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1849, p. 23.

Footnote 216:

  P. lxxxiii.

Footnote 217:

  Dennis, _Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria_, ii. p. 189; Micali, _Mon.
  Ined._ p. 216.

Footnote 218:

  _H.N._ xxxv. 160: Retinet hanc nobilitatem (_sc._ of Samian ware) et
  Arretium in Italia.

Footnote 219:

  Jahn, _Vasens._ p. lxxxii; Reinach, _Répertoire_, i. 163, 332; and
  see 166.

Footnote 220:

  Dennis, _Etruria_, ii. p. 431; Jahn, p. lxxxii; Reinach,
  _Répertoire_, i. 137, 161, 251, 384.

Footnote 221:

  See Plate XXVIII. and p. 370.

Footnote 222:

  See Dennis, ii. p. 307 ff.; Jahn, p. lxxix.

Footnote 223:

  Dennis, _ibid._

Footnote 224:

  _Brit. Mus. Cat. of Vases_, iv. p. 25, Nos. G 179–94: cf. _Class.
  Review_, 1897, p. 276, and _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1871, p. 5 ff.

Footnote 225:

  xi. 480 E.

Footnote 226:

  Dennis, _Etruria_, ii. p. 46. _Class. Review_, 1894, p. 277, gives
  some more recent finds.

Footnote 227:

  Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 47, p. 466: cf. _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1830,
  p. 233.

Footnote 228:

  See Jahn, p. lxxviii.

Footnote 229:

  Reinach, i. 203, 222 (Plate XXXIX).

Footnote 230:

  See also _Class. Review_, 1893, pp. 84, 381; 1894, p. 277.

Footnote 231:

  Dennis, i. p. 405; Jahn, p. lxviii.

Footnote 232:

  B.M. A 469, 1537, 1540.

Footnote 233:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1889, pls. 5–6, p. 218.

Footnote 234:

  F 479; also Reinach, i. 215. For a late R.F. vase with a Latin
  inscription from this site see _Röm. Mitth._ 1887, pl. 10, p. 231.

Footnote 235:

  Jahn, p. lxv.

Footnote 236:

  For an account of this tomb see Dennis, i. p. 33 ff., and above, p.
  39.

Footnote 237:

  See Chapter XVIII., and Roberts, _Gk. Epigraphy_, i. p. 17.

Footnote 238:

  See for these Chapter XVIII.

Footnote 239:

  _Cat._ 1655=Reinach, i. 199: see p. 319.

Footnote 240:

  The Antaios krater and the Petersburg psykter: see p. 431.

Footnote 241:

  Reinach, _Répertoire_, i. p. 106.

Footnote 242:

  P. lxvi. ff.: see also generally Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 355 ff.

Footnote 243:

  B.M. E 41.

Footnote 244:

  _Notizie degli Scavi_, 1902, p. 84 ff.

Footnote 245:

  _Class. Review_, 1894, p. 277.

Footnote 246:

  Reinach, i. 320.

Footnote 247:

  _Class. Review_, 1897, p. 226.

Footnote 248:

  Jahn, p. lxiv; Reinach, i. 109, 368; _Class. Review_, 1897, p. 276.

Footnote 249:

  Reinach, i. 345.

Footnote 250:

  1831; see also _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1831, p. 161. A view of the site
  is given in _Mon. dell’ Inst._ i. pl. 41.

Footnote 251:

  See generally Chapter XVIII. The finds are described in a work edited
  by Gsell, entitled _Fouilles de Vulci_ (1891).

Footnote 252:

  Eng. transl. p. 112.

Footnote 253:

  Besides the already cited _Rapporto Volcente_ of Gerhard in the
  _Annali_ for 1831, an account of these discoveries will be found in
  the _Muséum Étrusque_ of the Prince of Canino; _Trans. Royal Soc. of
  Lit._ ii. (1834), p. 76 ff. (Millingen); _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1829, p.
  188 ff.; Jahn’s _Einleitung_, p. lxviii; and an excellent description
  in Dennis’s _Etruria_, 2nd edn. i. p. 448 ff.: see also Chapter
  XVIII. Above all, reference should be made to the recent summary by
  Gsell (see above).

Footnote 254:

  Those who are curious in such matters may be grateful for a
  bibliography of the controversy: Lanzi, _Dei Vasi antichi dipinti_;
  Winckelmann, _Hist. de l’Art_, i. p. 188 ff.; Canino, _Mus. Étr._
  (1829), and _Cat. di scelte ant. Étr._; _Annali_, 1831, p. 105 ff.,
  1834, p. 285; _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1829, pp. 60, 113 ff., 1831, p. 161
  ff., 1832, p. 74 ff., 1833, p. 73 ff.; Gerhard, _Berl. ant. Bildw._
  p. 143; _Journal de Savans_, 1830, pp. 115 ff., 177 ff.; Kramer,
  _Styl und Herkunft_, p. 146; Thiersch, _Hell. bemalte Vasen_, etc.

Footnote 255:

  Finds of “Proto-Corinthian,” B.F., and R.F. fragments have been
  recently made in the precincts of the temple of Vesta (_Class.
  Review_, 1901, p. 93).

Footnote 256:

  A 1054 = _Bull. Arch. Nap._ ii. pl. 1, 1–2.

Footnote 257:

  See p. 483, and Patroni, _Ceramica Antica_, p. 79 ff.

Footnote 258:

  Mart. _Ep._ xiv. 114; Stat. _Silv._ iv. 9, 43.

Footnote 259:

  See Patroni, _op. cit._ p. 93, also Jahn, _op. cit._ p. lxii, for
  B.F. and other vases found here. Some of the vases are direct
  imitations of Athenian fabrics.

Footnote 260:

  Naples 3352–55.

Footnote 261:

  B.M. B 610.

Footnote 262:

  See Jahn, p. lxiii; Reinach, _Répertoire_, i. 317.

Footnote 263:

  See Jahn, p. lii. Those in the British Museum from Nola came chiefly
  from the Blacas collection.

Footnote 264:

  See also Reinach, _Répertoire_, i. 228, 348; _Branteghem Sale Cat._
  Nos. 84–5; and Jahn, p. li.

Footnote 265:

  Walters, _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, iv. p. 16; Patroni, _Ceram. Ant._ pp.
  37, 76.

Footnote 266:

  See Jahn, p. xlvi ff.

Footnote 267:

  _E.g._ Petersburg 355, and others in B.M.

Footnote 268:

  Petersburg 1187, 1427;  Naples 2991, S.A. 11, 708–9.

Footnote 269:

  See Jahn, p. l, for examples from this site, mostly of inferior
  merit; also Reinach, i. 250.

Footnote 270:

  Berlin 2694; _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1830, p. 21.

Footnote 271:

  B.M. F 157; Bibl. Nat. 422.

Footnote 272:

  Lenormant, _Grande Grèce_, i. p. 94.

Footnote 273:

  See Jahn, p. xl.

Footnote 274:

  For recent excavations see _Class. Review_, 1893, p. 381; 1894, p.
  129 (vases with subjects of Kanake and Theseus with the ring).

Footnote 275:

  Patroni, _Ceram. Ant._ p. 142; B.M. F 237–38.

Footnote 276:

  Cf. also Petersburg 778, 895.

Footnote 277:

  See p. 488, and B.M. F 543 ff.; for earlier vases, Reinach, i. pp.
  471–77.

Footnote 278:

  _La Grande Grèce_, i. p. 92 ff.

Footnote 279:

  See _Class. Review_, 1898, p. 185, for mention of two B.F. kylikes
  signed by Antidoros; also _Notizie degli Scavi_, 1903, p. 34 ff., 205
  ff., for other interesting B.F. vases, including signatures of
  Tleson, Sakonides, and Thrax. The two latter were found at Leporano,
  about ten miles S.W. of Tarentum.

Footnote 280:

  Mycenaean vases from this site are in the Louvre (Furtwaengler and
  Loeschcke, _Myken. Vasen_, p. 48).

Footnote 281:

  As for instance Munich 781 = Reinach, ii. 126.

Footnote 282:

  These discoveries are summarised in the _Class. Review_, 1894, p.
  278; 1896, p. 173; 1898, p. 428. Fuller details are given in the
  _Notizie degli Scavi_ for those years. See also Furtwaengler and
  Loeschcke, p. 47.

Footnote 283:

  Jahn, p. xxxi.

Footnote 284:

  _Arch.-Intell. Blatt_, 1836, No. 34, p. 283.

Footnote 285:

  Gerhard, _Auserl. Vasenb._ 329–30; _Forman Sale Cat._ No. 357.

Footnote 286:

  Millin-Reinach, ii. 61–2 (Taleides); _Mon. dell’ Inst._ i. pl. 52;
  B.M. B 295 (Nikosthenes); B.M. E 474, E 478: cf. Jahn, p. xxxii, and
  the index to Reinach’s _Répertoire_, _s.v._ Agrigente.

Footnote 287:

  _Röm. Mitth._ 1897, p. 261 ff.

Footnote 288:

  Jahn, p. xxxi.

Footnote 289:

  _Arch.-Intell. Blatt_, 1834, No. 56, p. 457 ff.: see also _Bull.
  della Comm. di Antich. in Sicilia_, 1872, p. 13 ff. pls. 4–5.

Footnote 290:

  P. xxxi. One of the late vases with burlesque scenes (_Mon. dell’
  Inst._ iv. pl. 12) was also found here.

Footnote 291:

  See _B.M. Cat. of Terracottas_, D 1–2; _Röm. Mitth._ 1897, p. 262.

Footnote 292:

  _Class. Review_, 1893, p. 231.

Footnote 293:

  Jahn, p. xxxii.

Footnote 294:

  _Ibid._ p. xxx.

Footnote 295:

  Reinach, i. 408.

Footnote 296:

  A B.F. vase in the Cagliari Museum is published in _Bull. Arch. Nap._
  N.S. iv. pl. 13.

Footnote 297:

  _J.H.S._ vii. pl. 62, p. 55.

Footnote 298:

  _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1842, p. 10.

Footnote 299:

  Jahn, p. xxix.




                              CHAPTER III
                           _THE USES OF CLAY_

    Technical terms—Sun-dried clay and unburnt bricks—Use of these in
      Greece—Methods of manufacture—Roof-tiles and architectural
      decorations in terracotta—Antefixal ornaments—Sicilian and
      Italian systems—Inscribed tiles—Sarcophagi—Braziers—Moulds—Greek
      lamps—Sculpture in terracotta—Origin of art—Large statues in
      terracotta—Statuettes—Processes of
      manufacture—Moulding—Colouring—Vases with plastic
      decoration—Reliefs—Toys—Types and uses of statuettes—Porcelain
      and enamelled wares—Hellenistic and Roman enamelled fabrics.


We now proceed to treat the subject of the fictile art among the Greeks
in its technical aspects, prefacing our study with a section dealing
with the uses of clay in general.

The term employed by the Greeks for pottery is ???aµ??, or for the
material ?? ?e?aµ???. The word for clay in a general sense is p????,
while ???aµ?? has the more restricted sense of clay as material for
fictile objects; the latter word is supposed to be connected with
?e?????µ?, to mix. They likewise applied to pottery the term ?st?a???,
meaning literally an oyster-shell, and ?st?????a t??e?µata[300] is also
an expression found for works in terracotta. Nor must we omit to
mention that p???? too comes to bear a restricted sense, when it is
applied to the unburnt or sun-dried bricks freely employed in early
architecture. Keramos was regarded by the Greeks as a legendary hero,
from whom the name of the district in Athens known as the Kerameikos,
or potter’s quarter, was derived.[301] The word ???aµ?? soon became
generic, and as early as Homer’s time we find such an expression as
????e?? ???aµ?? for a bronze vessel[302]; similarly it came to be used
for tiles, even when they were of marble (see below, p. 100). The art
of working in clay may be considered among the Greeks, as among all
other nations, under three heads, according to the nature of the
processes employed: (1) Sun-dried clay (Gk. p????a or ?µ?, Lat.
_cruda_); (2) baked clay without a glaze, or terracotta (Gk. ?? ?pt?);
(3) baked clay with the addition of a glaze, corresponding to the
modern porcelain. It is then possible to treat of the uses of clay
under these three heads. The first, from its limited use, will occupy
our attention but very briefly; the second, the manufacture of building
materials and terracotta figures, only technically comes under the
heading of pottery, and will therefore also receive comparatively brief
mention. It remains, then, that in the succeeding chapters, as in the
preceding, it will be almost exclusively with the third heading that we
are concerned. Before, however, dealing with this third heading, or
pottery, we may review briefly the purposes for which clay was worked,
under the other two headings of brick and terracotta.

The uses of clay among the Greeks were very varied and extensive.
Sun-dried clay was used for building material, and we have already seen
what an important part was played by pottery in their domestic and
religious life. The uses of terracotta are almost more manifold than
those of pottery. It supplied the most important parts both of public
and private buildings, such as bricks, roof-tiles, drain-tiles, and
various architectural adornments; and was frequently used in the
construction and decoration of tombs and coffins. Among its adaptations
for religious purposes may be noted its use as a substitute for more
expensive materials in the statues of deities, as well as the countless
figurines or statuettes in this material, many of which have been found
on the sites of temples or in private shrines; and besides the
statuettes and other figures, of which such quantities have been found
in tombs, it was used for imitations of jewellery or metal vases made
solely for a sepulchral purpose. It also supplied many of the wants of
every-day life, in the form of spindle-whorls, theatre-tickets, lamps
and braziers, and culinary and domestic utensils of all kinds, taking
the place of the earthenware of modern times. It supplied the potter
with moulds for his figures and the sculptor with models for his work
in marble or bronze, and placed works of art within the reach of those
who found marble and the precious metals beyond their means.

One of the most elementary uses of clay is for the manufacture of
building material, for which it plays an important part, as we have
already seen, in the history of the Semitic races. Both burnt and
unburnt bricks were employed in Egypt and Mesopotamia, and their use
has already been referred to in the Introduction. Vitruvius[303] speaks
of the use of brick in the palace of Kroisos at Sardis, and we also
read of the walls of Babylon and Larissa (on the site of Nineveh) as
being of brick.[304] Generally speaking, sun-dried bricks belong to an
earlier period of development than baked bricks; at any rate, this is
the case in the buildings of Greece and Rome.

In Greece itself the antiquity of brick is implied by the words of
Pliny,[305] who tells us that Hyperbius and Euryalus of Athens “were
the first to” construct brick-kilns (_laterarias_) and houses; before
their time men lived in caves. He further goes on to say that Gellius
regarded one Toxius as the inventor of buildings of sun-dried clay,
inspired by the construction of swallows’ nests. The reference is
obviously to the employment by swallows of straw and twigs to make the
clay for their nests cohere; this may well have suggested, in the first
instance, the principle of mixing straw with sun-dried clay bricks, as
was done by the Israelites in their bondage in Egypt. The method is one
still practised in the East, where in such countries as Palestine and
Cyprus whole villages built in this fashion may be seen.

There is no doubt, however, that in Greece, with its stores of marble
and stone for building, brick never became general, though it was
probably more used in sun-dried form in earlier buildings before the
Greeks had begun to realise the possibilities of stone buildings.
Pausanias[306] speaks of temples of Demeter at Lepreon in Arcadia and
Stiris in Phokis, of a shrine of Asklepios at Panopeus in Phokis, and
of the Stoa of Kotys at Epidauros (restored by Antoninus Pius) as being
of unburnt brick (p????). Of the same material was the cella of a
temple at Patrae[307]; but the walls of various cities, such as
Mantinea, were of burnt brick.[308]

Nor was the use of sun-dried clay confined to building material. It
seems also to have been employed for modelling decorations of public
buildings. Thus Pausanias mentions “images of clay,” representing
Dionysos feasting in the house of Amphiktyon, adorning a chamber in the
temenos of that god in the Kerameikos,[309] and it seems highly
probable that these are to be identified with the _cruda opera_ of one
Chalcosthenes or Caicosthenes mentioned by Pliny,[310] where the word
_cruda_ can only be used in a technical sense (Greek ?µ?). He also
mentions at Tritaea in Achaia[311] statues of the Te?? µ???st?? in
clay, and at Megara an image of Zeus by Theokosmos,[312] of which the
face was gold and ivory, the rest clay and gypsum.

Our knowledge of the use of brick (both burnt and unburnt) and
terracotta in Greek architecture has been largely increased, not to say
revolutionised, by recent discoveries in all parts of the Greek world,
and going back to a very remote period.

Recent excavations have yielded walls of unburnt brick at Eleusis,
Mycenae, Olympia, Tegea, and Tiryns.[313] The Heraion at Olympia, which
dates from the tenth century B.C., is a peripteral temple with stone
stylobate, pillars and _antae_ of wood, and cella-wall of unburnt
brick. In this respect it resembles the temple of Zeus and Herakles at
Patrae (see above). It also possesses the oldest known example of a
terracotta roof (Fig. 9.). A recently discovered temple at Thermon in
Acarnania is constructed of wood and terracotta, with painted
terracotta slabs in wooden frames for metopes; the style of the
paintings appears to be Corinthian, and they form a valuable
contribution to the history of early Greek painting.[314]

[Illustration:

  From _Durm’s Handbuch_.

  FIG. 9. DIAGRAM OF ROOF-TILING, HERAION, OLYMPIA.
]

The stone stylobate at the Heraion was a necessity because of the
destructive effect of the moist earth on terracotta; it consisted of a
row of vertical slabs on which the bricks were placed in regular
courses. We may see in this method of construction the forerunner of
the system, universal since that time, of building walls on a plinth,
which survives even to the present day. In the same way door-jambs and
lintels, which were of necessity made of wood, not of brick, continued
to be constructed in that material even after the introduction of
stone.[315] It has been assumed by some authorities that the Doric
style of architecture is derived from a wooden prototype; this, however
true of the Ionic style, is not altogether true of Doric. The
proportions of the latter are too heavy. A more probable explanation is
that it is the combination of wood with sun-dried tiles or bricks which
we see in the Heraion that developed with the introduction of stone
into the Doric system.[316]

It is then clear that although in Greece bricks were by no means
indispensable for building temples, houses, and walls, and though stone
and marble undoubtedly had the preference, especially in later times,
yet their use is more general than was hitherto supposed. But when they
are mentioned by classical authors it is generally when speaking of
foreign or barbarian edifices, such as the palace of Kroisos at Sardis
or the monument of Hephaestion at Babylon,[317] and in a manner which
shows that they were not much employed in Greece at the time when they
wrote. The older temple of Apollo at Megara is described by
Pausanias[318] as having been of brick (p??????), but we are left in
doubt as to whether this was baked or sun-dried; while the excavations
at Olympia have distinctly contradicted his statement[319] that the
Philippeion was of brick, as it is proved to have been built of stone
ashlar.[320] In 333–329 B.C. the Long Walls of Athens were constructed,
partly in brick, under Habron, son of Lykourgos, with Laconian tiles
for the roofs.[321] Other recorded buildings are all of late date and
under Roman influence, and we must leave an account of Roman
brick-building to be dealt with in a later chapter (XIX.).

There is an interesting passage in the _Birds_ of Aristophanes, in
which he is describing the building of the city of Nephelokokkygia, the
walls of which are apparently conceived as being of sun-dried brick. He
there speaks of “Egyptian brick-bearers,”[322] implying that the use of
brick was a characteristic distinction of that nation. The passage
(1133–51) is worth quoting in full, as showing the process employed in
the making of sun-dried bricks.

    _Mess._   Birds and none else; no bricklayer of Egypt,
              No stone-hewer was there, no carpenter:
              With their own hands they did it, to my marvel.
              There came from Libya thirty thousand cranes,
              All having swallowed down foundation-stones,
              Which with their beaks the rails still aptly shaped:
              Another party of ten thousand storks
              Were brick-makers: and water from below
              The plovers and the other wading birds
              Were raising up into the higher air.
    _Peisth._ And who conveyed the mortar[323] for them?
    _Mess._                                              Herons,
              In hods (?e???a?s??).
    _Peisth._ And how did they get in the mortar?
    _Mess._   That was the cleverest device of all, sir.
              The geese with their webbed feet, as though with spades
                 (?µa??),
              Dipp’d down, and laid it neatly on the hods.
    _Peisth._ What feat indeed may not be wrought with feet?
    _Mess._   Aye, and the ducks, by Jove, all tightly girt,
              Kept carrying bricks, and other birds were flying,
              With trowel on their head, to lay the bricks;
              And then, like children sucking lollipops,
              The swallows minced the mortar in their mouths.

                                                      (Kennedy’s Trans.)

Sun-dried bricks were known as p?????? ?µa? (_lateres crudi_); baked
bricks as p?????? ?pta? (_lateres cocti_ or _coctiles_). The Romans
also used the word _testa_ for baked brick, corresponding to the Greek
???aµ??. Vitruvius[324] distinguishes three varieties of unburnt
bricks, as used by the Greeks. One, known as “Lydian,” was also used by
the Romans, who named the bricks from their length _sesquipedales_;
their size was 1½ by 1 ft. The other two, exclusively Greek, were known
as pe?t?d???? and tet??d????, the word d???? signifying a “palm” or
three inches; in other words, they were respectively fifteen inches and
one foot square. The former was used for public buildings, the latter
for private houses, and they were arranged in the walls in courses of
alternate whole and half bricks, as is frequently done at the present
day. Vitruvius also speaks of bricks made at Pitane in Mysia, and in
Spain, which were so light that they would float in water.[325] He
advises that bricks should not be made of sandy or pebbly clay, which
makes them heavy and prevents the straw from cohering, so that they
fall to pieces after wet. Many other directions are given by him,[326]
but are too lengthy to quote here. Bricks were made in a mould called
p?a?s???, a rectangular framework of boards[327]; and the sun-dried
bricks were, as we learn from the passage quoted above, made by
collecting the clay with shovels (?µa?) into troughs (?e???a?) and
working it with the feet.[328] It is probable that we have some
allusion to the use of moulds in certain passages from the Latin
writers.[329] The final proceeding was the drying in the sun.

An important branch of the subject is the use of terracotta for
roof-tiles and other architectural decorations of temples and other
buildings. On this point our knowledge has during the last
five-and-twenty years been marvellously increased, the extent of its
use in architecture having been hitherto but little suspected.[330] The
generic term for a roof-tile is in Greek ???aµ??; they are generally
divided into flat tiles (ste?ast??e? or s???e?, _tegulae_) and
covering-tiles (?a??p??e?, _imbrices_). Besides the ordinary roof-tiles
there must also be taken into consideration four varieties of
ornamental tiles which found their place on a classical building. They
are: (1) the covering-slabs arranged in a row along the ?e?s??, or
raking cornice of the pediment; (2) the ??µ?t??? or cornice above the
?e?s??; (3) the cornice along the sides of the building, with spouts in
the form of lions' heads, to carry off rain-water; (4) the row of
antefixal ornaments or ????t???a surmounting the side-tiles.[331]

The flat roof-tiles or s???e?, as in the Heraion of Olympia and other
early buildings, are square and slightly concave, so that the raised
edges placed side by side may catch under the semi-cylindrical
?a??p??e?, and so be held in their place. The latter are of plain
semi-cylindrical form, except the row at the lower edge of the roof,
which have attached to them the vertical semi-elliptical slabs known as
“antefixae,” of which more later.

The ??µ?t?a were painted with elaborate patterns of
lotos-and-honeysuckle, or maeanders, in red, blue, brown, and yellow,
the principle being preserved (as always in Greek architectural
decoration) of employing curvilinear patterns only on curved surfaces,
rectilinear only on flat surfaces.[332] At the back was the gutter for
collecting rain-water, which ran off through the holes pierced at
intervals in the cornice, passing through the mouths of lions’ heads,
moulded in very salient relief. These correspond to the gurgoyles of
Gothic architecture. Many specimens have been found at Olympia,
Elateia, and elsewhere in Greece; one of the finest, from a temple of
Apollo at Metapontum, is now in the Bibliothèque Nationale at Paris. It
is very finely modelled, and the whole, with the background, richly
coloured in red, yellow, and black.[333] Spouts were sometimes modelled
in other forms, such as a Satyric mask, or the fore-part of a lion; of
the latter there are some examples in the British Museum.[334] In the
accounts for the erection of the arsenal at the Peiraeus there is an
interesting entry relating to these lions’ head spouts, in which they
are described as ?e?aµ?de? ???µ??e? ?e??t??ef??a?, “principal tiles
with lions' heads.”[335]

The invention of antefixae is attributed by Pliny[336] to Butades of
Sikyon, who is also credited with the invention of modelling in clay,
in a well-known story; “he was,” says Pliny, “the first to place masks
on the extremities of the roof-tiles, which were at first called
bas-reliefs (_protypa_), but afterwards alto-reliefs (_ectypa_).”[337]
It is possible that the ????µata ?pt?? ??? seen by Pausanias in the
Stoa Basileios at Athens[338] were ????t???a or antefixal ornaments at
the angles of the cornice, but they are more likely to have been
modelled free and in the round than in relief on a background.[339]
Such sculptured groups were not uncommon in Greek architecture; thus
the cornice of the pediment of the temple of Zeus at Olympia was
adorned with a series of figures of Victory. The groups above mentioned
represented Theseus slaying Skiron and Eos carrying off Kephalos; and
it is interesting to note that a terracotta group with the latter
subject found at Cervetri[340] also undoubtedly came from the cornice
of a building.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                                PLATE II

[Illustration:

  ARCHAIC ANTEFIXAE OF GRAECO-ITALIAN STYLE (BRITISH MUSEUM).
  1. SATYR AND MAENAD, FROM CIVITA LAVINIA; 2. FEMALE HEAD, FROM CAPUA.
]

                  ------------------------------------

The manner in which the antefixae were treated by the Greeks and
Etruscans for purposes of decoration is well illustrated in the British
Museum collection. In Cases 64–71 of the Terracotta Room may be seen a
series from Capua of archaic style, the front part being
semi-elliptical in form, having within an ornamental border a female
bust, Gorgon’s head, or other design in relief, all being richly
coloured (Plate II.). The back projects in a semi-cylindrical
termination, forming the covering-tile, with an arched support to the
upright piece. Similar antefixae were found by Lord Savile at Civita
Lavinia (see below), and some have elaborate subjects, such as Artemis
with two lions, or a Satyr and Maenad with a panther (Plate II.).[341]
Many have also been found at Cervetri, from which site came some
interesting friezes of terracotta now in the British Museum (B 626) and
at Berlin. These works of art, with which we must rank for their style
the reliefs on the archaic terracotta sarcophagus in the British Museum
(see Chapter XVIII.), show throughout a strong influence of Ionic art;
though all of local manufacture, their style is purely Greek, as is the
case with many of the contemporary works in bronze found in Italy.[342]

[Illustration: FIG. 10. TERRACOTTA ANTEFIX FROM MARATHON (BRITISH
MUSEUM).]

Antefixes from Hellenic sites are not so common, nor do they present
the same variety of subject or richness of colour. In many cases, as in
the fourth-century British Museum specimens from Asia Minor,[343] the
decoration is confined to scrolls and floral patterns in low relief,
the palmette being regarded as the most appropriate decorative motive
for this form of tile. An example of this type in the British Museum (C
902 = Fig. 10.), found on the field of Marathon, is inscribed with the
name Athenaios. Many later antefixes with remains of colouring have
been found at Tarentum, the subjects being chiefly heads of women or
mythological personages.

Roof-tiles proper have been discovered in large numbers both in Greece
and Italy. Olympia has proved the richest site in this respect, and
there are many specimens in the Museums of Athens and Palermo.[344]
Many of them have coloured decoration, and these terracotta remains are
almost the only evidence we now have of the extensive system of
colouring applied by the Greeks to their temples.[345]

At Olympia all the buildings have terracotta roofs except the temple of
Zeus and two others, the dates varying from the seventh century B.C.
down to Roman times. We know from Pausanias[346] that the temple of
Zeus was roofed with marble tiles in imitation of terracotta, an
invention traditionally attributed to Byzes of Naxos. The
covering-tiles of the Heraion roof (see Fig. 9.) end in semicircular
discs painted with ornamental patterns; the flat roof-tiles are of the
concave type described above. The normal sixth-century type of roof is
seen in the Treasury of the Megarians, which has smooth flat tiles and
covering-tiles ending in antefixes with palmette-and-lotos ornament,
and a kymation cornice with lion’s head spouts.

A greater variety of tiles is to be seen in the Treasury of Gela.
Here for the first time we note the introduction of a new system,
which consists in nailing slabs of terracotta over the surface of
the stonework, or, to use the convenient German term,
“Bekleidungstechnik.”[347] It is obvious at the first glance that
the origin of this practice dates from the time when buildings were
largely or wholly of wood, which required protection from the
weather. When the wood was replaced by stone, the fashion held its
ground for a time; but with the more extensive use of marble, which
could not well be covered in this manner, it disappeared altogether
in Greece.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                               PLATE III

[Illustration:

  PART OF ARCHAIC TEMPLE WITH TERRACOTTA ROOF, CIVITA LAVINIA, AS
    RESTORED
  IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM.
]

                  ------------------------------------

But the Treasury of Gela is by a Sicilian architect, and it seems
highly probable that the method of decoration employed was not one
usually practised in Greece, but was introduced from the Western
Mediterranean. Though rare in Greece, it is exceedingly common in
Sicily and Southern Italy. The middle temple (known as C) on the
acropolis of Selinus, and buildings at Gela and Syracuse, may be cited
as examples. The principle is also well illustrated in the terracotta
remains of the temple at Civita Lavinia, excavated by Lord Savile in
1890–94, which are now in the British Museum. They have, as far as
possible, been incorporated in a conjectural restoration in the
Etruscan Saloon (Plate III.).[348] It will be noted that most of the
slabs are pierced with holes, by means of which they were attached to
the walls or surface of the entablature; they are mostly decorated with
lotos-and-honeysuckle and other patterns, in relief and coloured, the
same being repeated in colour only on the back of the overhanging edges
of the cornice. These remains belong to two periods, the end of the
sixth century and the fourth century B.C.; they may be easily
distinguished by the differences in the treatment of the ornamental
patterns, while there is a marked absence of colouring in the later
remains. Similar architectural remains in terracotta have been found in
Etruria, and are described in Chapter XVIII. It should be noted that
the Civita Lavinia slabs are flat, whereas those used at Olympia, and
many others in Southern Italy and Sicily, are three-sided.

Specimens of ordinary Greek tiles have been found in many parts of the
ancient world, besides those for special architectural purposes already
discussed. Avolio[349] mentions many examples from Acrae and elsewhere
in Sicily, stamped with emblems or names of officials and of makers. At
Olbia, in Southern Russia, tiles were found stamped with names of Greek
aediles (?st???µ??), like the amphora-handles described below (p.
158),[350] and in Corfu tiles and bricks with names of magistrates
(p??t??e??), indicating in each case the existence of public
regulations concerning the potteries.[351] At Kertch (Panticapaeum) Dr.
Macpherson discovered large numbers of tiles with labels on which was
stamped the word [??S?????], “Royal,” together with other
inscriptions.[352] These tiles showed the manner of their attachment
one upon the other, and their dimensions answered to the Lydian variety
mentioned above. Other tiles discovered by Mr. Burgon at Athens, by Sir
Charles Newton in Kalymnos, and by Mr. Colnaghi at Kandyla (Alyzia) in
Acarnania, bore labels with inscriptions and designs in relief.[353] On
one of the latter series in the British Museum is the inscription
[ALYZEIÔN], “of the people of Alyzia” (Fig. 11); on another was
inscribed in the manner of the Athenian vases (see Chapters X. and
XVII.) [?????S] [????S] [???[S]???????] [?????], “Hippeus seems
handsome to Aristomedes.”[354]

[Illustration: FIG. 11. INSCRIBED TILES FROM ACARNANIA AND CORFU
(BRITISH MUSEUM).]

Inscribed tiles from Greece proper are somewhat rare, and the
best-known examples, to the number of sixteen, have been collected by
M. Paris[355]; they are usually inscribed with the word [????S??] or
[????S??S], as a sort of Government stamp. Others have magistrates’
names, as [F???F?S], ?]f??d(e)?s???, on a tile at Corinth, or the
maker’s name, [F?S???????], Fast?????t[??, on one from Thisbe in
Boeotia.[356] Those found by M. Paris at Elateia have either the word
[????S??S] or [?[?]?] with the name of the magistrate; though all are
fragmentary, it is possible to restore the full formula as p??????
d?µ?s?a ?p? ?pe???a, “government bricks, in the year of Apelleas’
office.”[357] A remarkable tile or _stele_, found near Capua and now in
the British Museum, has an inscription in Oscan, and two stamps of a
boar and a head of Athena, resembling types on Italian coins of the
early part of the third century.[358]

      [Illustration]                          [Illustration]
   From _Benndorf_                       From _Jahrbuch d. arch. Inst._
  FIG. 12. CALYX-KRATER                FIG. 13. OSTRAKON OF XANTHIPPOS.

We may recall the fact that it was with a tile that Pyrrhus met his
death when besieging Argos. Nor is this the only occasion on which
these humble objects have played a part in history. In the
well-known Athenian institution of Ostracism the act of voting was
performed by writing on fragments of tiles or potsherds the names
of those whom it was desired to banish. Recent excavations have
yielded more than one actual specimen of these ?st?a?a or
sherds,—one bearing the name of Megakles (Fig. 12.); another, part
of a painted vase from the pre-Persian débris on the Athenian
Acropolis, the name of Xanthippos, the father of Perikles (Fig.
13); and a third, that of Themistokles.[359]

It is also probable that in Greece, as among the Romans, the hollow
floors of the hypocausts, as well as the flue-tiles of the hot baths,
were made of terracotta. The same material was also used for the pipes,
by means of which water was conveyed from aqueducts or drained from the
soil. A drain-pipe from Ephesos in the Museum at Sèvres is noted by
Brongniart and Riocreux,[360] and others have been found at Athens[361]
and in the Troad.[362]

Tiles were also employed for constructing graves, as has already been
noted in Chapter II. (see p. 34). In some tombs the floor was paved
with flat tiles, and the roof was constructed of arched tiles forming a
vault. The flat and square tiles were not used for tombs until a
comparatively late period. Some graves had a second layer of tiles to
protect the body from the superincumbent earth.[363] We shall have
occasion to make further allusion to the use of painted terracotta
slabs in Etruscan tombs (Chapter XVIII.).

The sarcophagi which played so important a part in the tomb were also
frequently made of terracotta, this material being most commonly
employed in Etruria. We have already mentioned (p. 62) the series of
archaic painted sarcophagi, which have all come from Clazomenae, near
Smyrna, and furnish us with much valuable information on the art of
painting in Ionia in the sixth century B.C. They will receive some
attention from this point of view in Chapter VIII. The British Museum
contains two very remarkable examples of Etruscan terracotta
sarcophagi, which are described in Chapter XVIII., as well as a series
of smaller examples, which are mere cinerary urns. Among other examples
of terracotta as used in tombs may be mentioned here a series of small
reliefs found in tombs at Capua and elsewhere in Southern Italy. They
consist of masks of Satyrs, river-gods, and Gorgons, and are often
highly coloured in red and blue. They are of late archaic work, about
480 B.C., but the exact way in which they were used to decorate the
tombs is uncertain. The British Museum collection contains many
specimens of these objects.[364]

There is a curious class of objects which hardly come under the heading
of any other category, but may be conveniently discussed here. Complete
specimens are very rare, but there is one in the Museum at Geneva which
has been identified as a brazier (p??a???? or ?s???a), and more
recently as a baking-oven (???ßa???).[365] The form is that of a large
basin on a high stand, hollow underneath, with three square solid
handles projecting upwards from the rim. These handles, of which over a
thousand examples are to be found in various collections, are usually
the only part remaining, sometimes with part of the rim attached. They
are decorated with heads and other devices, usually in relief on square
panels, and the majority of these heads are of a Satyric or grotesque
character, wearing conical caps or adorned with ivy-wreaths. They
probably represent demons of some kind, and are placed there with
superstitious intent, to avert evil influences from whatever was baked
or cooked in the vessel. Similar masks are usually seen attached to
representations of forges and ovens on the painted vases,[366] and
remind us of the pseudo-Homeric invocation of evil deities against the
potters of Samos (see also p. 213 below). Professor Furtwaengler has
identified the heads as those of the Kyklopes, the attendant workmen of
Hephaistos.[367]

These objects are found all over the Mediterranean, especially at
Halikarnassos, Naukratis, and Delos, and the last-named place has been
regarded as the centre of their manufacture. They are all of the same
brick-like, coarse, red clay. Some bear the name of their maker,
Hekataios or Nikolaos. Besides the heads already mentioned, heads of
goats or oxen, or of Sirius, thunderbolts and rosettes are used by way
of devices. They have been collected together, and illustrations of all
the different types given by Conze in the _Jahrbuch_ for 1890, p. 118
ff.: two specimens are given on Plate IV. They belong to the
Hellenistic Age.

Other objects that exemplify the use of clay or terracotta in Greek
daily life are: moulds for vases and terracotta figures, lamps,
weights, and stamps for various purposes. Many flat discs of terracotta
have been found at Tarsus, Gela in Sicily, Tarentum, and other places,
pierced with two holes and about three inches in diameter.[368] They
are stamped with various devices and inscriptions, but their use is
unknown. Other discs of convex form found at Halikarnassos and stamped
with heads in relief are supposed to have been weights ([?e?a?) to hold
down the threads of the loom (?????e?),[369] such as are used by the
Greeks at the present day; others again may be the weights used for
keeping the ends of the folds of a himation in position. Small pierced
cones of terracotta often found in the fields of Greece have been
supposed to have been suspended round the necks of cattle, but are
probably weights of some kind.[370] Lastly, terracotta egg-shaped
objects have been found in Sicily inscribed with various names, and are
supposed to have been voting-tickets used for the ballots of the
tribes.[371]

Many examples have been found of terracotta impressions from coins,
which may have been the trial-pieces of die-sinkers or forgers, since
persons of that class, as among the Romans, seem to have employed this
material for their nefarious practices. They are more fully discussed
in Chapter XIX. The British Museum contains a large collection of these
found in the Fayûm in Egypt, all of Roman date; also a copy of a coin
of Larissa from Acarnania. Terracotta medallions with impressions of
gems or seals are not uncommon, especially in Asia Minor and at
Naukratis, and among the latter are many lumps of clay actually used as
seals, with the pattern of the substance in which they were impressed
adhering to the back of them, while on the front is a design from a
signet-ring.[372]

                  *       *       *       *       *

The subject of =Lamps= is one that is more conveniently and
appropriately treated in the Roman section of this work (see Chapter
XX.), almost all existing examples in terracotta being of that period;
it may not, however, be out of place to include here a few general
remarks on the subject, pointing out the distinctive features of those
of purely Greek origin.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                                PLATE IV

[Illustration:

  GREEK LAMPS AND “BRAZIER-HANDLES.”
  1, 3, 4, 6, LAMPS FROM GREEK SITES; 2, 5 BRAZIERS FROM HALIKARNASSOS
    AND CYPRUS (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

                  ------------------------------------

The invention of lamps was ascribed by Clement of Alexandria to the
Egyptians; and they were certainly in common use among the Greeks.
Herodotos[373] describes those which he saw in Egypt as simple saucers
filled with oil in which the wick floated, and this statement is partly
supported by the form of the lamps found in the earlier tombs of Cyprus
and on sites under Phoenician influence.[374] He also uses the phrase
pe?? ?????? ?f??, “about the time of lighting lamps,” to denote the
evening.[375] The Greek comic writers allude to the use of lamps of
terracotta or metal,[376] and they played a part in religious
ceremonies.

The regular Greek name for a lamp was ?????? (not ?aµp??, which means a
torch), and a lampstand was called ?????????; the spout or nozzle in
which the wick was placed was known as µ???? or µ??t??, the wick itself
as ?????????.[377] A lamp with more than one nozzle was known as
d?µ???? or t??µ????.[378] The simple form was that derived from the
Phoenician lamp, an open saucer with a bent-up lip in which the wick
was placed; but commonly the Greek lamp had a circular or oval body
(the receiver) with flat covered top, in the centre of which was the
filling-hole. To this was sometimes attached a handle permitting the
insertion of a finger, and the nozzle was usually very small and quite
plain. An epithet applied by Aristophanes[379] to a lamp is t?????at??,
“made on the wheel”; but evidence points to their being always made in
moulds.

The majority of the lamps which have been found on Greek sites are of
Roman date, and they frequently bear Latin inscriptions; those of the
Hellenic period are seldom ornamented, and are usually covered with a
thin black glaze. Others are modelled in the form of human figures,
animals, heads, or sandalled feet; the British Museum possesses a good
example of grey ware from Knidos in the form of a figure of Artemis
(_Cat._ C 421), with the oil-receptacle on the top of her head; another
from Naukratis represents Eros (see for these Plate IV.). One from
Athens was inscribed [?? ?????], “Do not touch,”[380] an inscription of
similar import to those on the Roman lamps from the Esquiline described
in Chapter XX.

Little has at present been done in the way of a scientific
investigation of Roman lamps, but the results of a rough classification
according to shapes show that certain forms are more specially
associated with Greek sites, and moreover frequently bear names of
makers in Greek letters. This is particularly the case with one form,
which appears to be confined to Athens, Corfu, the coast of Asia Minor,
and Cyprus. These lamps, of a pale yellow clay, have a circular body
with flat top, round the edge of which runs a border of impressed
egg-pattern, interrupted on either side by a small plain raised
panel.[381] The handle is small and pierced with a hole, the nozzle
also small, with straight sides. These lamps bear the makers’ names (in
the genitive), Primus ([???????]), Abaskantos ([???C??????]), etc., the
former being especially common; all are in Greek letters. Some again
only have a single letter or monogram engraved underneath. They are
often very carefully executed, with sharply cut details, and the
subjects are usually mythological (see Plate IV. fig. 1); they appear
to be of very late date, not earlier than the third century after
Christ.

Another form which appears to be specially characteristic of Greek
sites is that with a plain or heart-shaped nozzle, sometimes with a
groove incised at the base, but without a handle. They are usually
quite small, with circular bodies. Large numbers of these were found by
Mr. Newton at Knidos in 1859,[382] and by Mr. Barker at Tarsos in
1845.[383] The subjects are mostly poor and devoid of interest,
including animals, rosettes, and various floral patterns. Many of these
lamps bear the signature ROMAINE(N)SIS, the form of the word indicating
that they were made by a Roman residing abroad (_i.e._ at Knidos), not
in Rome.[384] A third form, approximating to the Christian type, has a
small solid handle and plain nozzle, and is confined to sites on or
near the coast of Asia Minor. These, with the remaining types of lamps,
will be more fully dealt with in the Roman section of this work. It
may, however, be worth while mentioning here that Mr. Newton found at
Knidos several lamps of a coarse black ware, covered with thin glaze,
which are mostly of large size. They are circular, and convex above,
and are supplied with two or more long nozzles with blunt terminations
radiating round them (see Plate IV. fig. 6). Between the nozzles are
roughly stamped devices of Satyrs’ heads, flowers, etc., in relief.
These may fairly be regarded as a Greek type.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The subject of Greek =sculpture in terracotta= is so wide as to demand
a volume to itself; but a discussion of the uses to which clay was put
by the Greeks would not be complete without some mention of their
achievements in this direction. We propose therefore briefly to review
the main features of Greek terracotta statuettes and reliefs, by way of
illustrating the purely artistic use which they made of this material.

The subject may be divided under four heads: (1) Large statues; (2)
Statuettes or figurines; (3) Reliefs; (4) Moulds. Large or life-size
statues belong more particularly to the earlier phases of Greek art,
but appear again in its later developments, under Italian influences.
Statues of terracotta were also a common feature of Italian art, being,
in fact, the usual material employed by Etruscan statuaries, as well as
for the decoration of temples (see Chapter XVIII.). Greek terracotta
statues are practically non-existent; and although there are some
female figures nearly life-size and a male torso of almost colossal
proportions in the British Museum, also a Hermes in the Vatican, these
were found at Rome, belong to the Roman period, and, though Greek in
style, are really following an Etruscan fashion.

It is characteristic of the Hellenic race that from its earliest
beginnings it did not employ clay for utilitarian purposes exclusively,
but, influenced partly by the natural imitative instincts of man,
partly by the anthropomorphic tendencies of the Greek religion, soon
learned the value of this easily worked material for producing images
of deities, animals, and other objects. Although an equally high
antiquity may be claimed for images of wood, and the word ??a??? used
for a primitive cult-statue argues for the frequent use of this
material, yet the history of the word p??sse?? tells equally in the
other direction. Originally used of moulding wet clay, it came by
degrees to denote modelling in general, and finally its derivative
p?ast??? became the authorised classical word for sculpture.

Lactantius[385] speaks of Prometheus as the inventor of fictile images
for religious purposes, and of figures in bronze and marble as a later
development; the Latin poets[386] bear similar witness to the primitive
use of clay for sculptured images, and Pliny marvels at its
long-continued employment in Italy.[387] Among early Greek legends the
most noteworthy is that of Butades, the potter of Sikyon, to whom the
invention of modelling clay in relief was ascribed by Pliny[388] and
Athenagoras. The story as told by the former was that, in order to
preserve the likeness of his daughter’s lover, he moulded in terracotta
the shadow of his profile which the girl drew on the wall. This
account, however, is not very intelligible, and the clue is perhaps to
be found in the words of Athenagoras,[389] who says that he hollowed
out the lines of the face in the wall, filled in the grooves with clay,
and so obtained his relief as from a mould. This primitive work of art
was said to have been exhibited in the Nymphaeum at Corinth.

But this same invention was also claimed by the Samian sculptors,
Theodoros and Rhoikos, who flourished about the end of the seventh
century. They were pre-eminently artists in bronze, and were associated
with the introduction of hollow-casting in that material into Greece;
it may therefore be supposed that they actually were among the first to
use clay models for statues, this being an essential preliminary to the
hollow-casting process. This would not be incompatible with the
invention of moulding reliefs by Butades, admitting the truth of his
story. The latter was also credited with the invention of antefixal
ornaments (see above, p. 98) and the introduction of a mixture of red
ochre or ruddle with clay in order to give it a warmer tone.

The clay models used by sculptors as the basis of their work, which
were known as p??p??sµata, were probably made on the same lines as the
large works of art in clay. We read that Lysistratos of Sikyon, the
brother of Lysippos, was the first to make casts of statues by means of
terracotta moulds,[390] implying that it was about this time that the
practice arose of multiplying the principal statues in the same manner
as is now done by means of plaster casts. Some of the latter artists
combined the plastic art with that of painting, and Zeuxis is said to
have previously modelled in terracotta the subjects which he afterwards
painted. Pasiteles, an artist who lived at Rome in the first century
B.C., always first modelled his statues in terracotta, and spoke of the
plastic art as the mother of statuary.[391] But it must not be supposed
that as a general rule the Greek sculptors worked their marble statues
from models; rather, the contrary was the case, and Pasiteles seems to
have been peculiar in this respect.

The statue of Zeus, which has already been mentioned as made by
Theokosmos for Megara (p. 92), appears to have been made from a clay
model. It was intended to be of gold and ivory, but the breaking out of
the Peloponnesian War prevented the artist from carrying out his
intention, and only the head was completed, the other portions being of
gypsum and terracotta. At a later period gypsum was sometimes used for
sculpture, as in the case of an Apollo mentioned by Prudentius,[392]
and some fragmentary remains from Cyprus in the British Museum.

The clay models were sometimes made entirely by hand, but more usually
on a wooden core known as ???aß??,[393] which we may conjecture to have
been formed of two rods in the form of a cross, from the use of the
Latin word _crux_ in this connection.[394] It was certainly a
framework, not a solid core, and must be carefully distinguished from
????aß??, a lay-figure. Aristotle, in an interesting passage, uses the
word in speaking of skeletons drawn on a wall.[395] The modelling of
details was done partly with tools, partly with the finger. The use of
the finger-nail for this purpose became proverbial, as in the saying
attributed to Polykleitos: “When the clay has reached the finger-nail
stage, then the real difficulty begins.”[396]

The chief attention of inferior artists was directed to the production
of small terracotta figures, which the Greeks used as ornaments or
household gods, buried in their tombs, or dedicated in their temples.
They follow the same lines of development as the larger sculptures,
beginning with the columnar (??a?a) and board-like (sa??de?) types
found in the primitive tombs of the Mycenaean and early Hellenic
civilisation. Originally they seem to have been manufactured purely for
religious purposes, but in course of time, with the gradual
rationalising of religious beliefs and consequent secularisation of
art-types, they lost this significance, and, while the _types_ were
preserved, they were converted into _genre_ figures from daily life.

These statuettes have been found on nearly all the famous sites of
antiquity from Babylonia to Carthage and Kertch; the most fruitful have
been Tanagra in Boeotia, Rhodes, the Cyrenaica, Capua and Canosa in
Italy, and various sites in Sicily. In Cyprus, Sardinia, and to a great
extent also in Rhodes, Phoenician influences seem to have been
dominant, and the earlier types bear a markedly Oriental character. For
beauty and charm the palm has by general consent been given to the
Tanagra statuettes of the fourth and third centuries, which were known
in antiquity as ???a? or “maidens,” from the prevalence of the seated
or standing types of girls in various attitudes.

The makers of these charming figures, known as ????p?sta? or
????p?????, were, like the vase-painters, quite in a subordinate
position in the artistic world, and are spoken of with some contempt by
Isokrates, as if it would be absurd to compare them with a Pheidias or
a Zeuxis.[397] A fable of Aesop’s[398] represents Hermes being offered
a statue of Zeus for a drachma and one of himself for a mere song; the
low price seems to suggest that they were of terracotta, but the vendor
is called an ??a?µat?p????, not a ????p?????. Demosthenes[399] condemns
the Athenians for voting for figure-head generals like makers of toys
for the market; and in further illustration of the uses to which they
were put, we may cite the definition of Suidas, of “those who fashion
little images out of clay of all kinds of creatures, with which to
trick children”; and the remark of Dio Chrysostom, who speaks of those
who buy the “maiden” figures for their children. A pretty epigram in
the _Anthology_[400] tells how Timareta, when about to marry, dedicated
to Artemis the playthings of her childhood, including her terracotta
dolls (???a?). Lastly, Plato speaks of ???a? and images hung up in
shrines.[401]

The processes employed in the manufacture of terracotta statuettes were
five in number: (1) the preparation of the clay; (2) moulding; (3)
retouching; (4) baking; and (5) colouring and gilding. It does not
follow that all five were employed in the production of any one object;
on the other hand, all processes necessary to the completion of any one
object fall under one or other of these heads.

There were many varieties of clay in use among the Greeks, some being
considered more suitable for one purpose, some for another. These clays
vary in their characteristics in different parts of the Greek world,
and this may often be an important criterion for distinguishing fabrics
and detecting instances of importation. The clay of Cyprus differs much
from that of Rhodes, and that of Naukratis again from either, being of
a dark, coarse, and brick-like consistency. M. Pottier noted nine
varieties of clay in use at Myrina in Asia Minor, and M. Martha
distinguishes five in the terracottas of Athens. But these differences
may be explained by variations in the length or temperature of the
firing rather than in the clay.

Generally speaking, the clay of the terracottas is softer and more
porous than that of the vases. It is easily scratched or marked, and
does not ring a clear sound when struck; nor does it when submitted to
a high temperature become so hard as the pottery.[402] Its colour
ranges from deep red to a pale buff colour, and its texture and density
vary greatly in different localities. It was prepared by being washed
free of all granular substances, and then kneaded with the aid of
water. So, as we read in Hesiod’s account of the creation of
Pandora,[403] the god directed the mixing of clay and water, in order
to form his new creation.

The modelling of the figures was done by hand in the case of the
earlier fabrics, and of small objects such as the toys and dolls; the
clay was worked up into a solid mass with the fingers, and the marks of
these, left while it was wet, may still be often seen. Subsequently the
use of moulds became universal, the final touches being given to the
figure either with the finger or with a graving-tool, traces of which
are often visible on the faces and hair of the Tanagra figures. These
were invariably moulded, and the finer ones show traces of having been
most carefully touched up.

There is a pretty epigram in the Anthology,[404] which seems to imply
that the wheel was sometimes brought into use for modelling figures,
perhaps for the first rough outlining. A statuette of Hermes is
supposed to say:

             The rolling circle of the potter’s wheel
             Me, Hermes, formed, of clay from head to heel.
             Mud-made, I lie not: the poor potter’s art,
             Stranger! was ever pleasant to my heart.
                                               (MACGREGOR.)

The process of moulding gave scope for reducing the “walls” of the
figure to the smallest possible thickness, thereby avoiding the danger
of shrinkage in the baking; it also rendered them extremely light, and
allowed of great accuracy in detail. A model (p??t?p??) was made in
terracotta with modelling-tools, from which the mould (t?p??) was
taken, also in terracotta,

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                                 PLATE V

[Illustration:

  MOULDS FOR TERRACOTTA FIGURES, WITH CASTS FROM THE MOULDS.
  2, 3. ARCHAIC, FROM RHODES; 1, 4. ARCHAISTIC, FROM TARENTUM (BRITISH
    MUSEUM).
]

                  ------------------------------------

usually in two pieces, which were then baked to a considerable
hardness. From this mould the figure was made by smearing it with
layers of clay until a sufficient thickness was reached, leaving the
figure hollow. The back was made separately, either from a mould or by
hand, and then fitted carefully on to the front, the join being
concealed by a layer of wet clay. The base was usually left open, and a
vent-hole was left at the back which may have served a double
purpose—first to allow the clay to contract without cracking, and
subsequently in some cases for the suspension of the completed figure.

The heads and arms were usually moulded separately and attached
afterwards, and altogether the average number of moulds employed—say
for a Tanagra figure—was four or five. M. Pottier[405] quotes an
instance of an Eros from Myrina which is made up of no less than
fourteen; yet it is not a specially complicated figure.

Greek moulds, either for statuettes or reliefs, are somewhat rare; but
the British Museum contains a fair number from Tarentum of all kinds
(see Plate V.).[406] Those that we possess are mostly for small
objects, such as figures of animals; but in the Museum collection there
are several moulds for reliefs, as well as for vases of the later class
with reliefs (see Chapters XI., XXII.), such as the Calenian phialae
with embossed designs.[407] Moulds employed for making stamps of
various kinds are also in existence; at Naukratis Mr. Petrie found
several circular “cake-stamps” with various designs. Of the moulds used
by forgers or others for copying coins we have already spoken (p.
106).[408]

The shrinkage of the clay as it dried afterwards permitted the figure
to be withdrawn easily from the mould, and it was then ready for the
necessary retouching. It is obvious from a glance at any collection of
terracottas that there is a great similarity between the various
representatives of any one type, and that actual or virtual repetitions
are by no means uncommon. This was, of course, due to the fact that
only a limited number of moulds were used, corresponding to the
different types. At the same time there are in almost all cases minute
differences which redeem them from a charge of monotony, and these were
obtained in various ways: by varying the pose of the head or attaching
the arms in different positions; by retouching before the baking; or by
the addition of attributes and colouring. As it has been neatly put by
M. Pottier,[409] “All the Tanagra figures are sisters, but few of them
are twins.” But retouching is not invariable, and is, in fact, confined
to the finer specimens, such as those of Tanagra. In the statuettes
from the Cyrenaica and Southern Italy it is the exception. The
difference which it effected may be well observed by comparing two
statuettes of Eros in the British Museum from Myrina (C 535–36), which
are from the same mould. They are identical in style and type, yet one
is far superior to the other in artistic merit, just because of the
greater finish of detail.

The process of baking required great care and attention; for if no
allowance was made for the evaporation of moisture, or if too great a
degree of temperature was reached, the result was bound to be
disastrous. It does not appear that a very high temperature was
reached, especially as compared with the pottery. The clay was further
insured against too rapid drying by preliminary exposure to the air. A
story told by Plutarch[410] of the fate which befell the chariot cast
for the temple of Jupiter on the Capitol illustrates the possibility of
disasters either from accident or carelessness. The clay swelled up to
such a size and hardness that it could only be extracted by pulling the
kiln to pieces.

The colouring of statuettes may be considered a fairly universal
practice, although not always suggested by their present appearance.
The earlier archaic specimens were not always, or only roughly,
coloured, and those of the Roman period seem to have been often left
plain; but otherwise it is the general rule. The surface on which the
colours were applied was formed by a white slip or _engobe_ of a creamy
colour and consistency, with which the whole figure (except the back)
was coated. This when dry becomes very flaky, and is liable to drop
off, carrying the colours with it; most statuettes retain at least
traces of this coating.

The method of painting is that known as _in tempera_, the pigments
being opaque, mixed with some stiffening medium. The colouring was as a
rule conventional, aiming at giving the figure a pleasing appearance,
without any particular regard to nature. It was applied after the
firing, as in that process the colours would have been liable to
injury. The tints are what are known as body-colours, without any
attempts at shading, and those usually employed are red, blue, yellow,
and black, the white slip forming a ground throughout, and left
untouched over the nude parts and often over the drapery; of these the
favourites, especially for drapery, were blue and red, as also we learn
from Lucian.[411] Pollux says it was a speciality of the ????p????? to
colour their figures yellow, or with a golden tint.[412] The reds range
in shade from scarlet to rose-colour and purple. At all times there was
a tendency to treat the drapery in masses of colour, and this we see
especially in the Tanagra figures, in which the chiton is almost
invariably blue, the himation rose-pink. At a later date it became more
customary to leave the drapery white, with borders and stripes only of
colour. Black was only used for details of features, such as the eyes;
green is very rare; and yellow was employed (in a deep brownish shade)
for the hair, and also for jewellery, etc. The use of gilding is at all
times rare in the statuettes; but some good examples are known—as, for
instance, two archaic statuettes from the Polledrara tomb, and a head
of Zeus, all in the British Museum.[413] Imitation jewellery in
terracotta gilt is not at all uncommon. On many of the earlier figures
from Cyprus the drapery is indicated by stripes of red and yellow laid
directly on the clay, while animals are usually decorated with stripes
of red and black; the method employed is the same as on the
contemporary vases (p. 253). Similarly, in the terracottas of the
Mycenaean and Geometrical periods, such as those from Boeotia, the
technique of the painted vases is closely followed, and the same
decorative patterns are employed.

The use of an enamelled glaze first appears at Athens in the fourth
century, and it is also occasionally found at Tanagra. The colour is
uniformly a dull ashen-grey. A few examples are also known from the
Cyrenaica, but it was in Sicily that the practice found most favour.
There we find attempts to reproduce the colouring of the flesh by an
enamel coating varying in hue from rose-pink to orange, and also grey
and purple tints.

It is probable that the colours employed for painting terracottas were
made from the same earths, though of a coarser kind, as the ware
itself. Some information on the subject may be derived from
Theophrastos, Vitruvius, and Dioskorides.[414] For white the artist
used a white earth, such as Melos produces, and white lead; it is also
said to have been produced from the burnt lees of wine, and from ivory.
The reds were composed of a red earth, probably ochre from Sinope, and
vermilion or _minium_. Yellow was obtained from Skyros and Lydia; and a
yellow ochre was obtained by burning a red earth.[415] The Egyptian
_smalto_ or cobalt served for blue, and a copper solution prepared with
alkali and silica was also employed. Copper green was obtained from
many places, and mixed with white or black.

                  *       *       *       *       *

This may be a convenient point at which to speak of a class of vases
which come rather under the heading of terracottas than that of painted
pottery. They are found at Calvi, Canosa, Cumae, and other places in
Southern Italy, and belong to the Hellenistic period, forming a
parallel development to the glazed wares with reliefs of which we shall
speak later (p. 497 ff.). They combine in a marked degree the
characteristics of the vase and the statuette, some being vases with
moulded reliefs or small figures in the round attached in different
places, others again actual figures or colossal heads modelled in vase
form by the addition of mouth, handle, and base (see Plate VI.). They
are usually of considerable—sometimes gigantic—size, and do not appear
to have served any practical purpose; some, indeed, are only imitation
vases with false bottoms. It is reasonable to suppose that they were
manufactured for sepulchral purposes only, like the large painted
kraters and amphorae of Apulia (p. 476).

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                                PLATE VI

[Illustration: TERRACOTTA VASES FROM SOUTHERN ITALY (BRITISH MUSEUM).]

                  ------------------------------------

Like the statuettes, they are covered throughout with a white slip laid
directly on the unglazed clay, and this is often richly coloured _in
tempera_. Some of the heads have the hair covered with intersecting
pink lines to imitate a net, and the figures attached to them are
usually coloured in the manner of the statuettes, with blue and pink
draperies. There are some, however, in which the encaustic or a similar
process seems to have been employed[416]; one example, in the British
Museum (D 185, shown on Plate VI.), has a Hippocamp painted on either
side in white and colours outlined with black, the wings being
elaborately rendered in blue, brown, yellow, and pink. The same process
is employed for a large cover of a vase in the British Museum from
Sicily (D 1), but the figures are now nearly obliterated.

The prevailing shape of these vases is that conventionally known as the
_askos_, with spherical body, over which passes a flat handle and three
mouths on the top; the latter are often covered in and figures placed
upon them. On the front and back of these vases _appliqué_ masks of
Medusa or figures in relief are usually placed, flanked by the
fore-parts of galloping horses. Others take the form of a large jug or
bowl with _appliqué_ ornaments.

It now remains to consider the small but interesting class of
terracotta reliefs, which are nearly all of the late archaic period,
dating from the beginning of the fifth century. Later reliefs are
nearly all architectural in character, and have already been described,
as have those which were made for the decoration of tombs and
sarcophagi. But the purpose for which the reliefs were made, of which
we are about to speak, is not so certain. One group appears from the
character of the subjects to be votive, and they may possibly have been
let into the walls of temples or shrines; but the others are mostly
known to have been found in tombs. The former group are found at Athens
and at Locri in Southern Italy; the latter at Melos and other sites
round the Aegean Sea, being usually known as “Melian” reliefs.

The character of the work of these Melian reliefs (see Plate VII.) is
exceedingly delicate and refined; the subjects are mainly mythological,
and include the slaying of Medusa by Perseus and of the Chimaera by
Bellerophon, Helle on the ram, Peleus seizing Thetis, Eos carrying off
Kephalos, and the death of Aktaeon. Three classes have been
distinguished,[417] of which the peculiarly Melian type has the figures
cut out, without background; in the second only the outer contours are
cut round, and the third consists of rectangular plaques.

Brunn[418] considers that they served a definite architectural purpose,
being intended to cover a field enclosed by borders, and that the holes
with which they are pierced show that they were used either for
suspension or attachment. But his reasons for regarding them as an
archaistic survival have not been generally accepted.

The Locrian type of relief takes the form of a square plaque.[419] They
are easily recognised by the rough micaceous character of the clay, and
by their subjects, which mostly relate to the myth and cult of
Persephone. They were probably dedicated in one of her shrines, as were
those found on the Acropolis at Athens to Athena. All these reliefs
seem to have been impressed in moulds, not modelled by hand, as many of
them exist in duplicate. Those from Greece are sometimes coloured.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                               PLATE VII

[Illustration:

  TERRACOTTA “MELIAN” RELIEFS, ARCHAIC PERIOD (BRIT. MUS.).
]

                  ------------------------------------

Many little figures in the shape of animals and other objects, such as
goats, pigs, pigeons, tortoises, chariots or boats, boys or apes riding
on animals, women making bread, and similar subjects, together with
jointed dolls or ?e???spasta, were evidently used as children’s toys.
They have been found deposited with the bodies of children in the tombs
of Melos, Rhodes, and Athens. In Mr. Biliotti’s excavations at Kameiros
in Rhodes in 1863, one child’s tomb was found containing two of the
“Melian” reliefs, small vases of glass and black-glazed ware, a
terracotta basket of fruit, and a sea-shell; in another were a bird,
two dolls, a child in a cradle, two grotesque figures, a woman playing
a tambourine, and two other terracotta figures.

The terracotta dolls were cast in a mould like the ordinary figures,
but the bodies, legs, and arms are formed of separate pieces pierced
with holes, so that they might be joined and moved with strings, like
the modern marionettes; hence their name of ?e???spasta, “drawn by
wires.” They all represent girls, and sometimes dancers with castanets
in their hands; they are coloured in the usual manner, and date from
various periods between 500 and 200 B.C. Allusion is sometimes made to
these figures in the Greek writers—as, for instance, by Xenophon, who
in his _Symposium_[420] introduces Socrates inquiring of an exhibitor
of these puppets what he chiefly relies on in the world. “A great
number of fools,” he replies, “for such are those who support me by the
pleasure they take in my performances.” Aristotle[421] mentions dolls
that moved their limbs and winked their eyes like marionettes, but this
can hardly refer to terracotta figures.[422]

                  *       *       *       *       *

It would require too much space to enumerate all the =subjects=
represented in the terracotta statuettes. But it may be found
convenient to give an outline of the subjects and principal types
adopted at different periods.[423] Roughly speaking, the range of
subjects may be divided into seven groups: (1) figures of deities; (2)
mythological subjects; (3) scenes from daily life; (4) imitations of
works of art; (5) caricatures; (6) masks; (7) animals. Among the
figures of the Olympian deities we find most commonly Demeter,
Aphrodite, and Artemis; Hephaistos, Ares, and Hestia are seldom if ever
represented; Zeus, Poseidon, Hera, and even Athena are also very rare.
Of the inferior deities, Dionysos, Persephone, Eros, and Nike (Victory)
are most frequently found, as well as Satyrs and similar personages.
Nor is it always easy to ascertain definitely whether a figure is or is
not intended to be mythological in significance.

This question is, in fact, closely bound up with that of the Uses for
which the statuettes were made, as on such a purpose their
interpretation in a mythological or human sense may largely depend. The
uncertainty of identification arises from the practice which obtained
of adhering closely to certain recognised _types_, which occur
repeatedly at all periods. There is a strong probability that a clear
distinction was not recognised by the Greek ????p??sta?, but that the
same type of figure might be used either for a votive offering to a
deity, or as a mere ornament or article of tomb-furniture. And we are
further met with the fact that a type which was mythological at one
period ceases to be so at another, or at any rate is transformed by
some slight alteration of details or omission of an attribute. Thus the
seated figure of an Earth-goddess or Nursing-mother of a Rhodian or
Cypriote tomb becomes the nurse and child of the fourth century at
Tanagra, while the archaic standing type of a Persephone holding a
flower requires little but the omission of her special head-dress to
transform her into the girl-type of the Hellenistic age.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                              PLATE VIII

[Illustration:

  ARCHAIC GREEK TERRACOTTAS (BRITISH MUSEUM).
  1. MAN WITH RAM (RHODES); 2. PERSEPHONE (SICILY); 3. RHODES; 4. DOLL
    (ATHENS).
]

                  ------------------------------------

The earliest beginnings of the statuette proper show, as might be
expected in primitive Greek art, a very limited range of ideas. As in
marble, bronze, and wood, so also in clay, the type of the female deity
reigns supreme. The primitive Hellenic type of goddess adopts two
forms, both derived from an original in wood, the board-form or sa???,
and the column-form (???? or ??a???), each of which finds parallels in
sculpture. The limbs are either completely wanting or of the most
rudimentary description, the figure terminating below in a spreading
base. Both these types are found in Rhodes, but on the mainland of
Greece the columnar form is confined to the Mycenaean period. In the
succeeding “Geometrical” age the board-like types rose into popularity
at Athens and Tegea, and above all in Boeotia. Two varieties are found,
a standing and a sitting type, and they are usually painted in the
manner of the local vases (see p. 290). The later examples show a great
advance in modelling, especially in the heads. The columnar form
exhibits its development best in the terracottas of the
Graeco-Phoenician period from Cyprus.

The standing and sitting goddess (Plate VIII.) are the two principal
types in archaic Greek art, and are remarkable for their wide
distribution and universal popularity. The name of the goddess may vary
with the locality, but the types remain almost identical, and the
attributes show little variation.

Another interesting archaic type is the so-called funeral mask or bust
(Plate VIII.), of which the best examples have come from Rhodes. Being
almost exclusively feminine, we must suppose that they ceased to
represent the image of the dead person, as in Egypt and primitive
Greece, and became images of the Chthonian goddess, Demeter or
Persephone, represented under the form of a bust rising out of the
earth.[424] Thus they played in the tombs the rôle of protection
against evil influences, like the mask of Demeter Kidaria, worn by the
priest at Pheneus in Arcadia on certain occasions.[425] Male masks are
occasionally found, representing the Chthonian Dionysos. They are very
rare after the fifth century.

The purely divine and mythological types in the archaic period are very
few in number. Of the Olympian deities few are represented, except in
the conventional hieratic types, hardly to be differentiated one from
another. But on certain sites are found representations of
nature-goddesses, such as the Earth-mother with a child in her lap
(Gaia Kourotrophos), or a nude goddess within a shrine, who may be a
combination of Astarte and Aphrodite. These types are of Oriental
origin, and are found in Cyprus, Rhodes, Naukratis, and Sardinia. They
may represent offerings made after child-birth. Among the
individualised deities we may point to figures of Hermes Kriophoros
(from Rhodes and Sicily),[426] of Herakles,[427] or of the local nymph
Kyrene, who appears holding the silphium-plant in a terracotta from
Carthage.[428]

Among miscellaneous feminine types are the _hydrophoros_ or
water-carrier, the woman riding on a mule, horse, or other animal, the
musician, and the mother nursing a child. Some of these have their
mythological counterparts, as in the Aphrodite riding on a goose, or
the Earth-mother, already mentioned. Male types are curiously rare, the
athletic influences, which are so strongly manifest in early Greek
sculpture, not affecting terracottas. The most popular is that of the
horseman, particularly in Cyprus. These figures are usually of a rude
and primitive kind, especially in Cyprus and at Halikarnassos. The
examples from Greece Proper show a more developed archaism, and are
found at Athens and in Boeotia. Sometimes instead of a horse the man
rides on a swan, mule, or tortoise.

Reclining male figures are sometimes characterised as Herakles or a
Satyr; but this type is most fully developed at Tarentum, in numerous
terracottas representing the well-known subject of the Sepulchral
Banquet, associated with a cult of the Chthonian deities.[429] There
are also various types of grotesque figures, usually in a squatting or
crouching attitude; some assume the form of a Satyr, and others are
obviously derived from the Egyptian figures of Ptah-Socharis, with bent
knees and protruding stomach.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                                PLATE IX

[Illustration:

  GREEK TERRACOTTAS OF HELLENISTIC PERIOD (BRITISH MUSEUM).
  1, 4, TANAGRA; 2, 3, SOUTHERN ITALY.
]

                  ------------------------------------

In the fine and later periods, from the end of the fifth century
onwards, the standing or seated feminine figures are still by far the
most prominent. The change, however, which has taken place, from
mythological to _genre_, has been described as an evolution rather than
a revolution, brought about by artistic, not religious, considerations.
The possible varieties of the feminine standing types may be best
studied in the Tanagra figures (Plate IX.), which include women or
girls in every variety of pose or attitude. In most cases the arms are
more or less concealed by the himation, which is drawn closely across
the figure; in others a fan, mirror, wreath, or mask is held in one
hand, the other drawing the edges of the drapery together. Some lean on
a column or are seated on a rock; others play with a bird or perform
their toilet. Imitations of the Tanagra figures, but vastly inferior in
merit, subsequently became popular all over the Greek world; they are
found at Myrina in Asia Minor, in Cyprus, the Cyrenaica, and many parts
of Southern Italy.

Among miscellaneous types of the Hellenistic period, many of the
archaic ones already mentioned retain their popularity. Others appear
for the first time, and are more in accordance with the spirit of the
age, such as girls dancing, playing with knucklebones, or carrying
one another pick-a-back. There is a beautiful group of two
knucklebone-players from Capua in the British Museum (D 161). The
dancing type is found widely distributed.

Figures of goddesses and mythological subjects are very rare at
Tanagra, but fairly common on other sites, as at Myrina and Naukratis.
Archaistic imitations of the archaic seated and standing goddesses are
often found in the Cyrenaica and Southern Italy; but the Chthonian
deities appear but rarely among the types of more advanced style. As in
sculpture and vase-paintings, Aphrodite now becomes the most prominent
among the feminine deities, and some of the later statuettes appear to
be reproductions of well-known works of art, the Cnidian Aphrodite, the
Anadyomene, or the crouching type of Aphrodite at the bath. Artemis and
Athena are occasionally found, but Nike (Victory) is really the most
popular figure after Aphrodite. She, however, plays little more than
the part of a female Eros, a counterpart to whom the Hellenic artist
felt to be a necessity. Formerly these winged female types were styled
Psyche, but this was a conception of post-Hellenistic origin.

Among the male deities the conditions remain much as before. Zeus
appears for the first time, and was especially popular at Smyrna, and
Sarapis and Asklepios are also occasionally found. In Naukratis the
influence of the Egyptian religion made itself felt in the production
of numerous figures of Bes, Harpocrates, and the like. Hermes is not
found so often as might have been expected, though there is a notable
instance in the British Museum (C 406) of a caricature of the famous
statue by Praxiteles, where a Satyr takes his place. Dionysos is only
met with occasionally, as are Satyrs and Maenads; but masks of a
Bacchic character are very common in Italy.

The one deity who really seems to have caught the popular taste is
Eros, although at the time when most of the Tanagra statuettes were
produced this popularity was hardly assured. The types of Eros
standing, seated, flying, or riding on animals are innumerable and
found all over the Greek world. The best examples come from Eretria in
Euboea, but Myrina and Sicily have also produced large numbers. They
vary from almost Praxitelean conceptions, like the Flying Eros from
Eretria in the British Museum (C 199), to the veritable Pompeian
_amoretti_ from the same site and from Myrina. The riding types of Eros
(on a horse, dog, swan, or dolphin) are chiefly found in the Cyrenaica
or Southern Italy. In many cases the Eros types are used for ordinary
unwinged boys.

Among the human male types a new feature is the introduction of the
athlete, as he appears in many boyish figures from Tanagra, and later
as a boxer among the somewhat coarse conceptions of the Roman period.
Some years ago a remarkable copy of the Diadumenos of Polykleitos in
terracotta was found in Asia Minor.[430]

                  *       *       *       *       *

In the tombs of the Aegean Islands, Italy, and elsewhere, a class of
ware has sometimes been found quite distinct from the ordinary fictile
pottery and resembling the porcelain or enamelled ware of the Egyptians
and Babylonians, such as the _ushabtiu_, found in the tombs of the
former, and the enamelled bricks of the latter. For the most part they
must be regarded as importations, of foreign manufacture, the medium of
commerce being the Phoenicians, who not only introduced Egyptian
objects of art, but themselves endeavoured to imitate them. Hence we
must distinguish some as of Egyptian origin, others as made by the
Phoenicians. As might be expected, they are most often found where
Phoenician influence was strong, as in Rhodes and Sardinia. Egyptian
perfume-vases have been found in the Polledrara tomb at Vulci (see
Chapter XVIII.) and may be dated by the accompanying scarabs of
Psammetichus I. as belonging to the end of the sixth century.

But these are by no means the earliest examples. In the Bronze Age
tombs of Cyprus occasional finds have been made of plates of blue
porcelain or faïence, with Egyptian designs going back to the
eighteenth dynasty[431]; and for several centuries other Egyptian
objects in porcelain, or with enamelled glaze, continue to be found in
the tombs of Cyprus, Rhodes, and Greece. And there is also a
considerable quantity of such wares which is not Egyptian in character,
although it may be to some extent imitative, and therefore demands
notice. Of this the most remarkable examples are the _rhyta_, or
drinking-horns, found at Enkomi in Cyprus, in 1896, and now in the
British Museum.[432] The two finest specimens are in the form of a
female head surmounted by a cup (Plate X.) and a ram’s head
respectively. Although found in tombs with Mycenaean objects, and
therefore presumably of early date, the style and modelling are so far
advanced—so purely Hellenic—that they may be compared with archaic work
of the sixth century B.C. or even later.

In the tombs of Kameiros in Rhodes,[433] along with Egyptian porcelain
objects, were found many vases of this ware, of apparently Greek
workmanship. This is further implied by the presence in one tomb of a
figure of a dolphin with a Greek [[?]?[T]?O [?]??], “I belong to
Pythes.”[434] It is quite conceivable that the Greeks of Rhodes (as of
Naukratis: see below) knew and practised Egyptian methods. The finds
include small _alabastra_ with friezes of men and animals in relief,
and flasks of a compressed globular shape similarly ornamented; also
_aryballi_ of various moulded forms, such as animals or helmeted heads
(Plate X. fig. 3). The vase in the form of a head seems to be an early
Phoenician idea; and this particular type of the helmeted head seems to
have been adopted subsequently by Ionian artists in the Clazomenae
sarcophagi.[435] Similar vases and figures have been discovered in the
tombs of Melos, Corinth, Cervetri, and Vulci, and also in Syria and at
Naukratis in Egypt.[436] Others again from the tombs of Kameiros and
Vulci take the form of jars of opaque glass ornamented with zigzag
patterns in white and dull crimson on a greenish ground.[437] A
specimen of somewhat similar ware was found in a Bronze Age tomb at
Curium, Cyprus, in 1895,[438] consisting of a tall funnel-shaped beaker
of blue and yellow glazed ware with an edging of dark brown (Plate X.).
The technique is superior to that of the later examples, and more on a
level with that of the porcelain _rhyta_ from Enkomi.

In Greece Proper there are altogether few traces of this enamelled
ware, and after the sixth century B.C. it quite disappeared. But some
very fine specimens have been found in the tombs of Southern Italy. A
jug with delicate ornamentation in blue and white came from Naples, and
a similar vase from the same site, but shaped like a _kalathos_ and of
a pale green colour, is now in the British Museum. Objects of this ware
have also been found on the site of the ancient Tharros in Sardinia.
Their glaze was a pale green, like that of the twenty-sixth dynasty
wares, and with them was found a scarab of Psammetichus I, which shows
them to be contemporaneous with the objects found in the Polledrara
tomb. But the strong Phoenician element in Sardinia is sufficient to
indicate that these fabrics are all of Egyptian importation.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                                 PLATE X

[Illustration:

  PORCELAIN AND ENAMEL-GLAZED WARES (BRITISH MUSEUM).

  4, 6, CYPRIOTE BRONZE AGE; 3, ARCHAIC GREEK (RHODES); 1, 2, 5,
    GRAECO-ROMAN PERIOD.
]

                  ------------------------------------

In the Hellenistic period, when vase-painting had reached its latest
stages, the fashion of glazed enamelled ware was revived; its chief
centre was Alexandria, which would naturally have carried on the
traditions of Egyptian porcelain or faïence. Specimens of glazed ware
with reliefs or modelled in various forms have been found at Naukratis
and in the Fayûm, including a fine blue porcelain head of a Ptolemaic
queen (Plate X.). In a tomb at Tanagra were found a beautiful _askos_
in the form of a duck on which Eros rides, and another porcelain
vase,[439] evidently imported from Alexandria, or some other industrial
centre of Hellenised Egypt. Porcelain jugs, inscribed with the names of
Arsinoe, Berenike, and one of the Ptolemies, have been found at
Benghazi in North Africa, at Alexandria, and at Canosa in Southern
Italy.[440] They are of blue ware, with reliefs of Greek style
attached. Fragments of the same kind dating from the first century B.C.
were found at Tarsos in Cilicia,[441] and in the Louvre there are
glazed wares covered with yellow or green enamel from Smyrna and Kyme.
The British Museum possesses similar vases from Kos and elsewhere, with
wreaths and similar patterns in relief (Plate X.), but these are not
earlier than the Roman period. Enamelled wares of early Roman date have
also been found on the Esquiline, and the ware is common at
Pompeii.[442]

It does not appear that the manufacture of these enamelled wares was
confined to one spot; they are found all over Asia Minor, Italy, and
Gaul, and in other countries bordering on the Mediterranean. It seems
probable, however, that there were three principal centres of the
fabric, at least in the Roman period. The first of these was in Asia
Minor, or the islands along its coasts, whence came the specimens found
at Tarsos, in Ionia, and in the islands such as Kos. These are mostly
small vases, of metallic form, especially in the treatment of the
handles (cf. Plate X., fig. 5), the colour being usually a bluish
green, though some examples are more polychromatic. These seem to have
been exported to Italy, and _viâ_ Marseilles to Gaul. Next, there are
the wares made at Alexandria, of which the vases described above are
examples. And, thirdly, there was a Gaulish fabric, which must probably
be located at Lezoux in the Auvergne (see Chapter XXIII.), examples
from which are found at Vichy, in the Rhone Valley, and at Trier and
Andernach in Germany.[443] Fragments of this ware are even reported to
have been found in England—as, for instance, at Ewell in Surrey, at
Colchester and Weymouth.[444] These are of grey clay with yellow,
green, or brown glaze, with ornaments of leaves, vine-branches, or
scrolls, stamped in moulds; the shapes are jugs, flasks, or two-handled
cups. A later variety is of white clay with a malachite-green glaze,
the forms being again of a metallic type, and towards the end of the
period imitations of glass with _barbotine_ decoration (see Chapter
XXIII.) appear. These two groups cover the first century after Christ.

Sometimes the ornamentation of the later glazed wares from Italy takes
the form of small reliefs (_emblemata_), made separately and attached
before the glaze was applied, and there are two or three specimens of
this class in the British Museum. It was also not infrequently used for
lamps, which, apart from the glaze, have all the characteristics of the
ordinary kinds, and even for figures of gladiators, boats, and other
objects. The glaze is of a thick vitreous character, and was not
improbably produced by lead; at all events a French writer[445]
maintains, in opposition to the views of Brongniart and Blümner, that
by a study of this ware he has established a knowledge of lead-glaze
among the ancients.[446]

-----

Footnote 300:

  Strabo, viii. p. 381 (the expression should probably be confined to
  vases with reliefs).

Footnote 301:

  Paus. i. 3, 1; Harpokration, _s.v._ ?e?aµe??.

Footnote 302:

  _Il._ v. 387.

Footnote 303:

  ii. 8, 10.

Footnote 304:

  Hdt. i. 179; Xen. _Anab._ iii. 4, 7. Cf. Ovid, _Mel._ iv. 57:

                          “ubi dicitur altam
            Coctilibus muris cinxisse Semiramis urbem.”

Footnote 305:

  _H.N._ vii. 194.

Footnote 306:

  v. 5, 4; x. 35, 5 and 4, 3; ii. 27, 7 (?µ?? t?? p??????: see Frazer’s
  note ad loc.); Nissen, _Pompeian. Studien_, p. 24.

Footnote 307:

  Vitr. ii. 8, 9.

Footnote 308:

  Xen. _Hell._ v. 2, 5; Paus. viii. 8, 5.

Footnote 309:

  ????µata ?? p????, i. 2, 5.

Footnote 310:

  xxxv. 155; see Milchhoefer in _Arch. Stud. H. Brunn dargebr._ p. 50.

Footnote 311:

  vii. 22, 6.

Footnote 312:

  i. 40, 4.

Footnote 313:

  See on the subject generally Dörpfeld and others, _Die Verwendung von
  Terrakotten_, Berlin, 1881.

Footnote 314:

  _Ath. Mitth._ xxiv. (1899), p. 350; ?f. ???. 1903, pls. 2–6, p. 71
  ff. Cf. the painted terracotta panels in wooden frames at Sparta,
  mentioned by Vitruvius (ii. 8, 9).

Footnote 315:

  See a passage in Xenophon (_Mem._ iii. 1, 7) bearing on the different
  materials used in Greek domestic architecture.

Footnote 316:

  See Dörpfeld, _Die antike Ziegelbau u. sein Einfluss auf d. dor.
  Styl_, in _Hist. u. Phil. Aufsätze E. Curtius gewidmet_, p. 139 ff.

Footnote 317:

  Diod. Sic. xvii. 115.

Footnote 318:

  i. 42, 5.

Footnote 319:

  v. 20, 5.

Footnote 320:

  Blümner, _Technologie_, ii. p. 11; _Olympia_ (_Ergebnisse_), ii. p.
  129 ff.

Footnote 321:

  _Inscr. Gr._ (_Atticae_), ii. 167.

Footnote 322:

  ????pt??? p?????f???? (l. 1133).

Footnote 323:

  An obviously incorrect rendering of p????;  Tr. pêlos the process of
  making sun-dried bricks is certainly here referred to, as the
  allusion to ????pt??? p?????f???? implies.

Footnote 324:

  ii. 3, 3.

Footnote 325:

  ii. 2, 4.

Footnote 326:

  ii. 2, 1, 2. For further details see Chapter XIX.

Footnote 327:

  Ar. _Ran._ 800, quoted by Pollux, x. 148: cf. Plut. _Vit. Sol._ 25.

Footnote 328:

  For representations of this process in Egyptian wall-paintings see
  Rosellini, _Mon. Civili_, ii. p. 255, pl. 49, 1, and Wilkinson,
  _Manners and Customs_, i. p. 344.

Footnote 329:

  Isid. _Orig._ xix. 10, 16: _lateres ... inde nominati sunt quod lati
  ligneis formis efficiuntur_. Cf. _ibid._ xv. 8, 16.

Footnote 330:

  See on the subject generally, Dörpfeld, _Die Verwendung von
  Terrakotten_, 1881, and Borrmann’s excellent treatise in Durm’s
  _Handbuch d. Architektur, Die Keramik in d. Baukunst_ (1. Theil, Bd.
  4), p. 28 ff.; also Wiegand, _Puteol. Bauinschr._ pp. 719, 756 ff.

Footnote 331:

  On the origin of ????t???a see Benndorf in _Jahreshefte_, 1899, p. 1
  ff.

Footnote 332:

  Cf. _B.M. Cat. of Terracottas_, C 904.

Footnote 333:

  Rayet and Collignon, pl. 16.

Footnote 334:

  _Cat. of Terracottas_, D 707–8.

Footnote 335:

  Boeckh, _Urkunde über Scewesen_ (_Staatshaushaltung_, iii.), p. 406.

Footnote 336:

  _H.N._ xxxv. 151.

Footnote 337:

  _H.N._ xxxv. 152.

Footnote 338:

  i. 3, 1.

Footnote 339:

  The use of the word ??a?µa also seems to point to this conclusion.

Footnote 340:

  _Arch. Zeit._ 1882, pl. 15.

Footnote 341:

  _J.H.S._ xiii. p. 315. See generally, Minervini, _Terrecotte del
  Museo Campano_.

Footnote 342:

  See Furtwaengler, _Meisterwerke_, p. 250.

Footnote 343:

  _Cat. of Terracottas_, C 910 ff.

Footnote 344:

  A good example of a painted tile from Aegion in Achaia is in the
  British Museum (_Cat. of Terracottas_, C 908).

Footnote 345:

  Cf. also the tiles from the temple at Elateia in Boeotia, described
  by M. Paris, _Élatée_, p. 106.

Footnote 346:

  v. 10, 3. It is noteworthy that Pausanias here uses the word ???aµ??,
  although the tiles are not of terracotta, indicating that it had
  become by long usage the generic word for tiles of all kinds. Cf. St.
  Luke v. 19.

Footnote 347:

  See Dörpfeld, etc., _Verwendung von Terrakotten_, pls. 1–4;
  _Olympia_, ii. p. 193 ff.

Footnote 348:

  See _Builder_, 4 March 1899, p. 219.

Footnote 349:

  _Fatture di argille in Sicilia_, pp. 27, 31.

Footnote 350:

  Becker in _Mélanges Gréco-Romaines_, i. (1854), p. 482 ff.

Footnote 351:

  _Inscr. Gr._ ix. p. 164.

Footnote 352:

  _Antiqs. of Kertch_, pp. 72, 75, pl. 7.

Footnote 353:

  See _Brit. Mus. Cat. of Terracottas_, E 131 ff., E 186.

Footnote 354:

  Boeckh, _C.I.G._ i. 541.

Footnote 355:

  _Élatée_, p. 110.

Footnote 356:

  See also _Ath. Mitth._ 1877, p. 441, for a long inscription from
  Sparta.

Footnote 357:

  Others with ?p? and a magistrate’s name are in the British Museum
  (_Cat. of Terracottas_, E 131–33, 186 ff.): see also _Inscr. Gr._ ix.
  735 ff.

Footnote 358:

  _B.M. Cat. of Terracottas_, E 130.

Footnote 359:

  See Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ p. 50, pl. 29, fig. 10; _Jahrbuch
  d. arch. Inst._ ii. (1887), p. 161; _Ath. Mitth._ 1897, p. 345; Hicks
  and Hill, _Gk. Hist. Inscrs._ p. 16.

Footnote 360:

  _Musée de Sèvres_, p. 19.

Footnote 361:

  _Ath. Mitth._ ii. (1877), pl. 8, p. 119; Daremberg and Saglio,
  _Dict._ i. p. 1260, fig. 1673.

Footnote 362:

  Daremberg and Saglio, i. p. 338, fig. 399.

Footnote 363:

  Cf. Stackelberg, _Gräber der Hellenen_, pl. 7; Dodwell, _Tour_, i. p.
  452.

Footnote 364:

  _Cat. of Terracottas_, B 494 ff.

Footnote 365:

  Benndorf in _Eranos Vindobonensis_, p. 384.

Footnote 366:

  Fig. 67.. Cf. also Berlin 2294, and see Daremberg and Saglio, _s.v._
  Caminus.

Footnote 367:

  _Jahrbuch_, vi. (1891), p. 110.

Footnote 368:

  _B.M. Cat. of Terracottas_, E 156 ff.

Footnote 369:

  See _J.H.S._ xiii. p. 80.

Footnote 370:

  Cf. Macpherson, _Antiqs. of Kertch_, p. 103.

Footnote 371:

  Boeckh, _C.I.G._ iii. 5686.

Footnote 372:

  For examples of these see _B.M. Cat. of Terracottas_, E 93 ff.

Footnote 373:

  ii. 62.

Footnote 374:

  See Daremberg and Saglio, _art._ Lucerna, _init._; _Cyprus Mus. Cat._
  p. 80.

Footnote 375:

  vii. 215.

Footnote 376:

  Ar. _Eccl._ 1; Axionikos, quoted by Pollux, x. 122.

Footnote 377:

  The words f??µ?? and ???a???? seem to denote the _material_ of which
  the wick was made (cf. Pollux, x. 115).

Footnote 378:

  Pollux, vi. 103; x. 115.

Footnote 379:

  _Loc. cit. supr._

Footnote 380:

  _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1868, p. 59.

Footnote 381:

  Probably an imitation of the projections on bronze lamps, to which
  chains for suspension were attached. See on this type _Amer. Journ.
  of Arch._ 1903, p. 338 ff.

Footnote 382:

  Newton, _Travels and Discoveries_, ii. p. 184=_Discoveries_, ii. pt.
  2, p. 395.

Footnote 383:

  Barker and Ainsworth, _Lares and Penates_, p. 201.

Footnote 384:

  See _C.I.L._ iii. Suppl. No. 7310.

Footnote 385:

  _Div. Inst._ ii. 11.

Footnote 386:

  Juvenal, xi. 116; Propertius, v. 1, 5; Ovid, _Fast._ i. 202.

Footnote 387:

  _H.N._ xxxiv. 34.

Footnote 388:

  _H.N._ xxxv. 151.

Footnote 389:

  _Leg. pro Christ._ 17, 293, _ed._ Migne; see Blümner, _Technologie_,
  ii. p. 129, note 2.

Footnote 390:

  _H.N._ xxxv. 153.

Footnote 391:

  _Ibid._ 156.

Footnote 392:

  _Apotheosis_, 458. See generally Blümner, ii. p. 140 ff.

Footnote 393:

  Pollux, x. 189; Hesych., _s.v._; _Ber. d. sächs. Gesellsch._ 1854, p.
  42; Blümner, ii. pp. 42, 117; and cf. p. 153 below.

Footnote 394:

  Tertull. _Apol._ 12; _ad Nat._ i. 12.

Footnote 395:

  _Anim. Gener._ ii. 6; _Hist. Anim._ iii. 5.

Footnote 396:

  Plut. _De profect. in virt._ 17, p. 86 A; _Quaest. conviv._ ii. 3, 2,
  p. 636 C.

Footnote 397:

  _De permut._ 2.

Footnote 398:

  _Fab._ 137 (Teubner).

Footnote 399:

  _Phil._ i. 9, § 47.

Footnote 400:

  _Anth. P._ vi. 280.

Footnote 401:

  _Phaedr._ 230 B.

Footnote 402:

  Brongniart, _Traité_, i. p. 305.

Footnote 403:

  _Op. et Di._ 60: ???e?se ... ?a?a? ?de? f??e??.

Footnote 404:

  _Anth. P._ xvi. 191.

Footnote 405:

  _Statuettes de Terre Cuite_, p. 251.

Footnote 406:

  _Cat. of Terracottas_, E 1 ff.

Footnote 407:

  See also for some interesting moulds from Girgenti, _Röm. Mitth._
  xii. (1897), p. 253 ff. Similar specimens have been found at Kertch
  and Smyrna.

Footnote 408:

  See also on the subject C. C. Edgar, _Greek Moulds_ (_Cat. du Musée
  du Caire_, viii. 1903), pls. 23–8, 33, p. xiv ff. These moulds are
  nearly all made of plaster; but the account there given of the
  technical processes would hold good of terracotta moulds.

Footnote 409:

  _Op. cit._ p. 254.

Footnote 410:

  _Poplic._ 13: see Chapter XVIII.

Footnote 411:

  _Lexiph._ 22.

Footnote 412:

  vii. 163.

Footnote 413:

  _Cat._ B 458–59, D 392.

Footnote 414:

  See Blümner, _Technologie_, iv. p. 464 ff.

Footnote 415:

  Hirt, _Gesch. d. bild. Kunst_, p. 165.

Footnote 416:

  Pliny (_H.N._ xxxvi. 189) mentions one Agrippa who painted in
  encaustic on terracotta: see Chapter XIX. for possible examples of
  this process.

Footnote 417:

  Schöne, _Gr. Reliefs_, p. 62.

Footnote 418:

  _Sitzungber. d. k. bayer. Akad. Phil. Cl._ 1883, p. 299 ff.

Footnote 419:

  See for those from Athens _J.H.S._ xvii. p. 306 ff.

Footnote 420:

  iv. 55.

Footnote 421:

  _De Mundo_, 6, 398.

Footnote 422:

  See on the subject Hermann, _Lehrbuch d. gr. Altert._ iv. (1882), p.
  295; Blümner, _Technol._ ii. p. 123; Baumeister, _Denkm._ ii. p. 778.

Footnote 423:

  A _Corpus_ of all the known types of terracotta statuettes has
  recently been published by the German Archaeological Institute,
  edited by Dr. F. Winter (_Typen der figürlichen Terrakotten_, 2 vols.
  1903).

Footnote 424:

  Cf. the types on painted vases, Vol. II. Chapter XII. (Eleusinian
  deities).

Footnote 425:

  Paus. viii. 15, 3.

Footnote 426:

  B.M. B 258, 410.

Footnote 427:

  B.M. B 256, 286, 335.

Footnote 428:

  B.M. B 359: cf. p. 344.

Footnote 429:

  _J.H.S._ vii. p. 9 ff.

Footnote 430:

  _J.H.S._ vi. pl. 61.

Footnote 431:

  Cesnola, _Cyprus_, p. 102; _B.M. Excavations in Cyprus_, p. 35, fig.
  63.

Footnote 432:

  _B.M. Excavations_, p. 22, pl. 3.

Footnote 433:

  See Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ i. p. 150; Dumont-Pottier, i. p. 193;
  Perrot, _Hist. de l’Art_, iii. pl. 5.

Footnote 434:

  Roberts, _Gk. Epigraphy_, i. p. 192.

Footnote 435:

  Cf. _J.H.S._ iv. p. 11. Heuzey, however, thinks that the Phoenicians
  imitated the Greek painted examples of this time (such as A 1117 ff.
  in B.M.). Cf. _Gaz. Arch._ 1880, p. 159.

Footnote 436:

  Good examples are given in Perrot, _Hist. de l’Art_, iii. p. 676;
  _Gaz. Arch._ 1880, pl. 28 (in Louvre, from Corinth); _Ath. Mitth._
  1879, pl. 19: cf. also Berlin 1288–91, and many examples in B.M.
  (First Vase Room). On one from Kos was found the name of Apries
  (599–569 B.C.). See also _Naukratis I_. pl. 2, figs. 6–18.

Footnote 437:

  Perrot, _Hist. de l’Art._ iii. pl. 6.

Footnote 438:

  _B.M. Excavations_, p. 69, fig. 99.

Footnote 439:

  Furtwaengler, _Coll. Sabouroff_, i. pl. 70, fig. 3 (with text); Rayet
  and Collignon, p. 374.

Footnote 440:

  See _Journ. des Savans_, March 1862, p. 163; _Rev. Arch._ vii.
  (1863), p. 259 (name of Ptolemy wrongly read as Kleopatra); _Arch.
  Zeit._ 1869, p. 35; Rayet and Collignon, p. 372.

Footnote 441:

  _Gazette des Beaux-Arts_, Nov. 1876, p. 385 ff.

Footnote 442:

  Von Rohden, _Terracotten von Pompeii_, p. 29.

Footnote 443:

  Hettner in _Festschr. für J. Overbeck_, p. 169.

Footnote 444:

  _Archaeologia_, xxxii. p. 452 (Ewell); British Museum, Romano-British
  Room, Case H.

Footnote 445:

  Mazard, _De la connaissance par les anciens des glaçures
  plombifères_; cf. Blümner, _Technol._ ii. p. 89.

Footnote 446:

  On the subject generally see Dumont-Pottier, i. chap. xiii.; Rayet
  and Collignon, p. 365 ff.; Daremberg and Saglio, _s.v._ Figlinum, p.
  1131; and for the Graeco-Roman enamelled wares, _Bonner Jahrbücher_,
  xcvi. p. 117, and Mazard, _op. cit._, where a full description and
  list of examples is given.




                              CHAPTER IV
                    _USES AND SHAPES OF GREEK VASES_

    Mention of painted vases in literature—Civil and domestic use of
      pottery—Measures of capacity—Use in daily life—Decorative
      use—Religious and votive uses—Use in funeral ceremonies—Shapes
      and their names—Ancient and modern classifications—Vases for
      storage—Pithos—Wine-amphora—Amphora—Stamnos—Hydria—Vases for
      mixing—Krater—Deinos or Lebes—Cooking-vessels—Vases for pouring
      wine—Oinochoe and variants—Ladles—Drinking-cups—Names recorded by
      Athenaeus—Kotyle—Skyphos—Kantharos—Kylix—Phiale—Rhyton—
      Dishes—Oil-vases—Lekythos—Alabastron—Pyxis—Askos—Moulded vases.


Those who are acquainted with the enormous number of painted vases now
gathered together in our Museums, showing the important part they must
have played in the daily life of the Greeks and the high estimation in
which they were clearly held, as evidenced by the great care bestowed
on their decoration and the pride exhibited by artists in their signed
productions, may feel some surprise that so few allusions to them can
be traced in classical literature. Such passages as can be interpreted
as referring to them may actually be counted on the fingers of one
hand, and even these are but passing allusions; while any full
descriptions of vases, such as that in Theocritus' first Idyll or some
of those in Athenaeus’ Book XI., almost invariably refer to metal vases
with chased designs. Nor can we trace any reference to known potters or
artists in literature or documents, save in a few inscriptions recently
found at Athens, which are, of course, of secondary importance for
literary history.

More general allusions to pottery and its use in daily life are common
enough, and it would hardly be profitable to quote all such passages in
detail; many indeed, such as the early allusion to the potter’s wheel
in the _Iliad_ (see p. 207), have found a place elsewhere in this work.
The passage of Homer at all events supplies proof, if such were needed,
that the use of the wheel was known in early times in Greece.

Of undoubted references to painted vases there are but two, though both
of them are particularly interesting, as they refer to well-known
special classes of Attic vases. The earlier of the two is in Pindar’s
tenth Nemean Ode,[447] in which he celebrates the victory of Thiaios of
Argos, who had twice been successful in the Panathenaic games at
Athens. He says:

   ?a?a d? ?a??e?sa p??? ?a?p?? ??a?a?
   ?µ??e? ??a? t?? e?????a ?a??, ?? ?????? ???es? paµp????????.[448]

These prize-vases are also mentioned by Simonides of Keos:

           ?a? ?a?a???a???? stef????? ??ße p??t’ ?p’ ???????
           ???? ?µf?f??e?? ??a???.[449]

The other passage, from the _Ecclesiazusae_ of Aristophanes (l. 996),
is equally well known. One speaker, in somewhat contemptuous terms,
alludes to “the fellow who paints the lekythi for the dead”:

             ?? t??? ?e????s? ????afe? t??? ????????.[450]

These lekythi may with certainty be identified with the white Athenian
variety decorated with appropriate subjects and made specially for
funerals (see Chapter XI.). The best examples of this class belong to
the very period at which the _Ecclesiazusae_ was written (392 B.C.),
but most of them show signs of being hastily executed or made to be
sold at a low price. It is probably for this reason that the speaker
implies his contempt for the painter, although at the same time it
seems likely that vase-painters, like all craftsmen, were looked down
upon by the Athenians of that day, in spite of the real beauty and
artistic merit of their productions.

One or two doubtful allusions must next be considered. The lyric poet
Alcaeus, who flourished 610–580 B.C., seems to allude to painted vases,
but the reading is very doubtful. The passage is read by Bergk as
follows (_Poet. Lyr. Graec._ iii. p. 165, frag. 41):

          ??d d' ?e??e ??????a?? µe???a??, a?t’ ?t?, ????, ?a???
                      ... ???ee ????a?? ??a ?a? d??
          p??a?? ??? ?ef??a?, ? d’ ?t??a t?? ?t???? ?????
          ???t?.[451]

Ahrens[452] read a??a p?????a? for a?t’ ?t?, ????, ?a??, and other
versions have been suggested. Bergk’s reading is very uncouth, and it
certainly seems as if p?????a?? was intended, whatever the preceding
word. If it is allowed to stand, it obviously implies _painted_ vases,
as in the paµp???????? of Pindar.

In the speech of Demosthenes _De Falsa Legatione_ (p. 415) occurs a
passage which is generally taken as having reference to painted vases:
?a? s?, F????a?e?, s? µ?? t?? ??aßast????a? ???f??ta ?a? t? t?µpa?a,
“And you, Philochares, who paint the alabastos-stands and the
pediments.” The word ??aßast????? is commonly supposed to describe a
stand with holders for pots of perfume (also called ??????, see below,
p. 195), although most painted examples of this vase found in Greece
are of very early date. The t?µpa?a are more easy of explanation, being
the triangular pediments of temples, which, like the metopes of the
so-called Theseion at Athens and those at Thermon (p. 92), were no
doubt often adorned with paintings in place of sculpture.

Other passages, if they do not actually refer to painted or even to
fictile vases, are at least of value as giving information as to the
current names for those in every-day use, or as to various purposes for
which they were used. Reference will be made to many of these in the
course of the chapter.

Suetonius in his Life of Caesar (§ 81) describes how the colonists who
were sent out under the _Lex Julia_ to build new houses were destroying
ancient tombs for the purpose when they came upon remains of ancient
pottery (_aliquantum vasculorum operis antiqui_), the discovery of
which caused them to redouble their efforts in the work of destruction.
Similarly Strabo[453] tells us that when Julius Caesar sent colonists
to rebuild Corinth they came upon tombs containing large quantities of
?st?????a t??e?µata, which they nicknamed “Necrocorinthia.” The meaning
of this expression is somewhat doubtful, but the word t??e?µata seems
to imply chased or relief work, and it is probable that these were not
painted vases, but Hellenistic ware with reliefs, like the so-called
Megarian bowls.[454] The latter can be identified, by means of their
subjects, with the _scyphi Homerici_ of which Nero was so fond;
Suetonius tells us that they were so named _a caelatura carminum
Homeri_, from the subjects from Homer’s poems carved in relief upon
them.[455] The _scyphi_ were doubtless of metal, the use of which was
confined to the wealthy and luxurious, while the so-called Megarian
bowls and similar ware were copied from them in the cheaper material
for the use of the humbler classes.

We see, then, that classical literature throws but little light on the
uses made of painted vases as such by the Greeks. But we are by no
means ill supplied with information as to the uses of pottery in
general, about which evidence may be obtained both from the vases
themselves and from innumerable passages in ancient writers or the
commentaries of the scholiasts and lexicographers. This question is
more or less bound up with that of the different shapes and names of
vases, of which some 150 have been handed down by Athenaeus, Pollux,
and other writers, and these will be considered in detail subsequently.
For the present it may suffice to say a few words on what is known of
the use of pottery in general and of painted vases in particular.

As most of the vases hitherto known have been discovered in tombs, it
would at first sight appear that they were exclusively destined for
sepulchral purposes; but this seems to have been in many cases only a
subsequent use of them, and they doubtless also found a place among the
wants of daily life. That this is true of the plain unglazed or
unpainted pottery goes indeed without saying; in regard to the painted
vases the question is, in view of the scanty literary evidence, more
difficult to decide.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 14. HEMIKOTYLION (VASE USED AS MEASURE).
  BRITISH MUSEUM.
]

As the civil and domestic use of pottery is the most important, it is
necessary to consider it first. For ordinary purposes earthenware
largely took the place of bronze and the precious metals, just as it
does at the present day. One instance of this we have already quoted in
speaking of the “Homeric bowls,” and others might be cited, in
particular its use for measures, for which metal would naturally be
employed as a general rule. This usage is established by the occasional
discovery of vases inscribed with the names of measures and the like.
The British Museum possesses a small one-handled cup of black glazed
ware (F 595 = Fig. 14) found in the island of Cerigo (Kythera), on
which is incised in fifth-century lettering the word [????????????],
?µ???t?????, or “half-kotyle.” The word ??t??? is interesting as
denoting not only a shape of a drinking-cup (see below, p. 184), but a
Greek measure, equivalent to about half a pint. Again, in 1867, a
cylindrical vase of red ware was found at Athens inscribed [????S???],
d?µ?s???, or “public (measure).”[456] It was stamped with the figure of
an owl and an olive-branch, the official seal of Athens, and has been
supposed to represent the ?????? or quart, its capacity having been
estimated at 0·96 litres, or 1¾ pints, while the ?????? is generally
reckoned as equivalent to 1 litre.[457]

Many of the names in common use for shapes of vases are also found
applied to measures of capacity either for liquid or dry stuffs; and it
is possible that herein lies the explanation of the somewhat puzzling
_graffiti_ inscriptions found under the feet of Attic vases (see
Chapter XVII.), where the words used seem to have no relation to the
vase itself. Thus in liquid measure the amphora (?µf??e??) or ??d??,
also known as µet??t??, was equivalent to about 7½ gallons, and was
divided into 12 ??e?, the ???? into 12 ??t??a?, which, as we have seen,
answer to our ½-pints. The ???ßaf? was one-fourth of a ??t???, the
??a??? one-sixth.[458] All these words were in common use to express
various forms of vases, as will be seen later on. Further, the word
?e??µ???, which, like the Latin _testa_, is used generally for pottery,
has a more restricted sense of a cask or vessel used for transporting
wine, and is even used as a term of measure, presumably equivalent to
the amphora.[459]

Earthenware was also used generally for the purpose of storing liquids
or various kinds of food, for the preparation of food and liquids, and
for the uses of the table or toilet. The painted ware, however, was not
employed for the commoner purposes, nor to contain large quantities of
liquids, for which it would have been far too expensive. But we know
that it was largely used at banquets and drinking-bouts, and on other
occasions, from the evidence of the vases themselves. Thus, in the
well-known vase with the Harpies robbing the blind Phineus of his food
(p. 357), a kotyle painted with black figures is seen in the king’s
hands; and in a scene representing the reception of Paris by
Helen,[460] the former is offered wine drawn from a large four-handled
vase on which figures are painted.[461] Vases with subjects represented
on them are also seen placed on columns forming the background of
scenes, as if forming part of the furniture of a hall or chamber. But
as a general rule the vases represented in banquet scenes and elsewhere
are left plain or only decorated with patterns.

To the use of vases in connection with athletic games we have already
alluded in discussing Pindar’s mention of the Panathenaic amphorae; it
is, of course, likely that other forms of vases were also given as
prizes or presented to young men on special occasions, such as entering
the ranks of the ?f?ß?? or being married, but we have no evidence of
such customs.

[Illustration: FIG. 15. CHILD PLAYING WITH JUG (BRITISH MUSEUM).]

Vases were also used as toys, as is proved by the discovery of many
little vases, chiefly jugs, in the tombs of children at Athens, on
which are depicted children playing at various games.[462] They are too
small to have served any other purpose, and as similarly shaped jugs
appear among the toys used by the children in these scenes, it is
reasonable to suppose that they were playthings. No doubt some of the
more unusual shapes were made with the same end, such as vases in the
shape of animals or fruit, or the aski (p. 200), which contained little
balls and were used as rattles.

We have already hinted at the purely decorative use of vases as
domestic ornaments, in which capacity they were often placed on
columns; there is, however, no hint of this in ancient authors. But
that it was customary in Greece and Italy, at all events in the later
period (_i.e._ after the Persian Wars), seems to be indicated by the
practice which obtains with the larger vases of executing only one side
with care, while the other exhibits an unimportant and badly painted
design (generally three boys or men wrapped in mantles). It is natural
to suppose that the carelessly executed side was not supposed to be
seen, owing to the fact that the vase was intended to be placed against
a wall. Some of the large round dishes of Apulian fabric seem to have
been intended for hanging up against a wall, on the same principle.[463]

The question which next arises is that of the extent to which vases
were used for religious and votive purposes. Here, however, with one
exception noted below, we derive little aid from a study of the painted
vases themselves, in spite of the frequency of mythological subjects.
But inasmuch as many instances are known of offerings of metal vases in
the temples of the gods, it can hardly be doubted that painted vases
served the same purpose for those who could only afford the humbler
material. It was at one time supposed that the large vases painted for
a front view only, of which we have just spoken, were destined for this
purpose; but as they are mostly found in tombs, this can hardly be the
case.

Of late years, however, much light has been thrown upon this question
by means of scientific excavations. On many temple-sites which have
been systematically explored, such as the Acropolis of Athens or
Naukratis in the Egyptian Delta, enormous numbers of fragments of
painted vases have been found which are clearly the remains of votive
offerings. It was a well-known Greek custom to clear out the temples
from time to time and form rubbish-heaps of the disused vases and
statuettes, sometimes by digging pits for them; and thus these broken
fragments, rejected from their apparent uselessness, have from these
very circumstances been preserved to the present day to cast a flood of
light on many points of archaeology. At Naukratis many of the fragments
bear incised inscriptions in the form of dedications to Apollo (Fig.
16.) or Aphrodite, according to the site on which they were found. At
Penteskouphia near Corinth a large series of early painted tablets,
with representations of Poseidon and inscribed dedications, were found
in 1879 (p. 316), and illustrate the practice of making offerings in
this form, mentioned by Aeschylos.[464] Tablets painted with figures
and hung on trees or walls are not infrequently depicted on red-figured
vases, the subject generally implying their votive character.[465] Fig.
17. represents a youth carrying a tablet of this kind.

[Illustration: FIG. 16. RIM OF VASE FROM NAUKRATIS WITH DEDICATION TO
APOLLO (BRIT. MUS.).]

[Illustration:

  From Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._
  FIG. 17. YOUTH WITH VOTIVE TABLET.
]

There is no doubt that vases (though not, perhaps, painted ones) must
have played a considerable part in the religious ceremonies of the
Greeks. In the Athenian festival of the Anthesteria, the second day was
devoted to the holding of ????e? ??t?????, or “pot-contests,” vessels
full of corn being dedicated to Hermes Chthonios.[466] At the festival
of the Gardens of Adonis flower-pots of earthenware containing flowers
were cast into the sea, as a type of the premature death of
Adonis.[467] These flower-pots were also placed on the tops of houses,
and in this same festival, which was chiefly celebrated by hetairae,
little terracotta figures (???????a) were introduced.[468] The use of
flower-pots placed in windows to form artificial gardens is mentioned
by Martial and Pliny[469]; and they were also employed to protect
tender plants, as hinted by Theophrastos,[470] who speaks of the
necessity of propagating southernwood by slips in pots.

It is, perhaps, hardly necessary to speak of the constant use of the
jug and bowl (_phiale_) in sacrifices and libation scenes, as seen on
innumerable vases of the R.F. and later periods (see pp. 178, 191).
Fig. 18 shows the use of vases on the occasion of a sacrifice to
Dionysos. There is also a type of vase which, according to a recent
writer,[471] was used for burning incense. It is a form which hitherto
had been conventionally named the ?????, on account of its recurved lip
(see below, p. 187); but it is pointed out that it had three feet (the
form being clearly derived from the tripod), and therefore stood, and
was not carried about; also that it varies much in size, and is found
at an early date, and chiefly in women’s graves.[472] There is also
evidence that it was meant to stand fire or hold coals. From these
details the conclusion is deduced that it represents the earlier form
of incense-burner (down to about 500 B.C.), those of later date being
of a different form, as often seen on R.F. vases.[473]

[Illustration:

  From _Furtwaengler and Reichhold_.
  FIG. 18. VASES USED IN SACRIFICE (FROM VASE AT NAPLES).
]

The most important use, however, for which vases were employed, and
that to which their preservation is mainly due, was for purposes
connected with funeral ceremonies. These were of a varied nature,
including the use of vases at the burial, the placing of them on the
tomb to hold offerings, and the depositing of them in the tomb, either
to hold the ashes of the dead or as “tomb-furniture,” in accordance
with the religious beliefs of the Greeks on the life after death. The
principal methods in which they have been found deposited in the tombs
have already been described in Chapter II.

Vases were employed in the burial rites in various ways, as we learn
from the subjects depicted upon them. In the celebrated vase
representing the death and funeral of Archemoros,[474] two persons are
seen carrying tables laden with vases to the tomb, while an oinochoë is
placed under the bier on which the corpse is laid. It is also probable
that they were often burnt on the funeral pile with the corpse, and if
this is the case it may account for the discoloured condition of many
fine vases in which the red glaze has turned to an ashen grey under the
action of fire.[475] In any case vases were often broken before being
placed in the tomb, the idea being that they must participate in the
death of the person to whom they were consecrated. There is a special
class of B.F. amphorae found at Athens, which are commonly known as
“prothesis-amphorae,” the subjects relating exclusively to the p???es??
or laying-out, and other funeral rites. They were, therefore, probably
placed round the bier during this ceremony.

Vases were also used for holding milk, oil, unguents, and other liquids
which were poured upon the corpse, or for the lustral water placed at
the entrance of the tomb. It was the regular practice of the Athenians
to place vases on the outside of the tombs, the commonest forms being
that of the lekythos, or a larger vase known as the ???t??f????,
mentioned by Demosthenes.[476] These were, however, generally of stone,
and are sometimes sculptured in relief, or bear inscriptions like the
Attic stelae[477] and modern tombstones.

The custom of placing lekythi on tombs is also alluded to once or twice
by Aristophanes in the _Ecclesiazusae_—_e.g._ line 538:

                         ??d’ ?p??e?sa ???????,

and again, line 1032:

              ?a? ta????sa? ?a? pa????? t?? ????????.[478]

[Illustration: FIG. 19. FUNERAL LEKYTHOS, WITH VASES INSIDE TOMB (BRIT.
MUS.).]

The manner of employing vases as adjuncts to the tomb is nowhere better
illustrated than on the Athenian white lekythi, which are almost all
painted with funeral subjects, and, from the hasty way in which many
are executed, show that they were often made to order at short notice
(see above, p. 132). In particular, one example in the British Museum
(D 56 = Fig. 19) shows the interior of a conical tomb or tumulus,
within which vases of various shapes are seen. In other examples they
are ranged along the steps of a stele, or are represented as being
brought to the tomb in baskets by mourning women.[479] The larger vases
of Southern Italy, which similarly show by their subjects that they
were only made for funeral purposes, bear a close relation to the white
lekythi, and also to the Attic funeral stelae with reliefs. The
treatment of the subject varies in the different fabrics, but two main
types prevail. In the one, of Lucanian origin, the tomb takes the form
of a stele or column, round which vases are ranged on steps[480]; in
the other, on the large Apulian kraters and amphorae, the tomb is in
the shape of a ????? or small temple, within which is seen the figure
of the deceased, while on either side approach women bearing offerings
(Fig. 106); but vases do not play an important part in these latter
scenes.

[Illustration: FIG. 20. VASES PLACED ON TOMB (LUCANIAN HYDRIA IN BRIT.
MUS.).]

Thirdly, we have to deal with the use of painted vases in the tomb
itself. As regards their use as cinerary urns, to contain the ashes of
the dead, it appears to have been somewhat restricted.

In the Mycenaean period we know that inhumation, not cremation, was the
practice, contrary to that of the heroic or Homeric age, in which an
entirely different state of things is represented. But when we do read
in Homer or the tragic poets, of the methods of dealing with the ashes
of the dead, there is no mention of any but metal urns. Thus the ashes
of Patroklos were collected in a ???s?? f????[481] (the word is
probably used loosely), while those of Achilles were stored in a golden
amphora.[482] Again, Sophokles, in the fictitious account of Orestes’
death given in his _Electra_, uses the expression (l. 758)[483]:

                             ?? ß?a?e?
          ?a??? µ???st?? s?µa de??a?a? sp?d??,

showing that metal vases were generally employed for this purpose.

No instances occurred among the early tombs in the Dipylon cemetery at
Athens or elsewhere in Greece before the sixth century, nor was the
practice usually favoured by the Etruscans, who employed painted vases
in their tombs exclusively as furniture. In Mycenaean times in Crete
coffers (????a?e?) of terracotta, painted like the vases, were used as
_ossuaria_[484]; and similarly in Etruria at all periods the remains of
the deceased were placed in rectangular chests or sarcophagi of
terracotta or stone. But in the earliest tombs of Etruria and Central
Italy urns and hut-shaped receptacles for the ashes were invariably
employed (see Chapter XVIII.).

It is, however, probable that in course of time there was a partial
adoption of the practice in Greece. As early as the middle of the sixth
century there is an instance in the well-known Burgon Panathenaic
amphora, now in the British Museum,[485] found by Mr. Burgon in 1813;
it contained remains of burnt bones and several small plain vases. This
would seem to indicate that the Panathenaic amphorae in particular were
considered appropriate for this purpose, namely, that the cherished
prize won by the living should be used for the most sacred purpose in
connection with the dead.

Among the red-figured vases of the fifth century which have been found
to contain ashes, may be mentioned the famous Vivenzio vase at
Naples,[486] which was found carefully deposited within another vase at
Nola, and a vase of the shape known as ??ß??, now in the British
Museum, found near the Peiraeus.[487] There is also a covered vase in
the British Museum,[488] which was employed for a similar purpose. It
is not, strictly speaking, a painted vase, being covered with a white
slip and coloured like the terracottas, while the heads of monsters
project from its sides; the shape is that known as ?e???? (“tureen”),
and it dates from the fourth century. It contained human bones, among
which were found a small terracotta figure of a Siren and other
objects; the jaw-bone, which was preserved, had still fixed in it the
_obolos_, or small silver coin which was placed there as Charon’s fare
for ferrying the soul over the Styx. Of later date is a vase found at
Alexandria, in the catacombs, similarly decorated, and also filled with
bones; it was presented to the British Museum in 1830 by Sir E.
Codrington.

The class of large terracotta vases found in tombs at Canosa, Cumae,
Capua and Calvi (Cales), of which fine specimens may be seen in the
Terracotta Room of the British Museum (see above, p. 119), seems to
have been made for sepulchral purposes, as in many cases they are not
adapted for practical use. On the other hand, they may have been
ornaments for houses. They are decorated with figures in high relief,
or attached to different parts of the vase, and many of them,
especially those in the form of female heads, are strictly speaking not
vases at all, having no proper bottom.

The majority of painted vases found in the tombs must be regarded
purely as tomb-furniture, placed there with the idea that the deceased
would require in his future life all that had been associated with his
former existence. Sometimes they were placed round the corpse, with
food or liquids in them for the use of the “ghost,” and instances are
known of eggs and other objects having been preserved in this
manner.[489] Toy-vases are found buried with children in tombs at
Athens and elsewhere, and toilet-boxes or unguent-vases in women’s
graves. Nevertheless, it is probably not wide of the mark to say that
in the sixth and fifth centuries the custom had lost much of its
original meaning; the habit of placing painted vases in tombs survived,
but the original idea of the practice had become obscured, and the
religious significance was restricted to certain classes of vases, the
prothesis-amphorae, white lekythi, and others, which were not used
during life but only made specially for this purpose.

Great value seems to have been set upon the painted vases by their
possessors. When broken, they were repaired by the pieces being
skilfully fitted and drilled, with a rivet of lead or bronze neatly
attached to the sides. Several mended vases exist in the European
collections.[490] Occasionally they were repaired by inserting pieces
of other vases. Thus a vase with two handles, found at Vulci, of the
shape called st?µ???, is repaired with a part of a kylix representing
quite a different subject, and thus presents a discordant effect.[491]
A R.F. vase in the Louvre has actually been mended with part of a B.F.
vase.[492] A B.F. kylix in the British Museum (B 398) has a piece
inserted with the name of Priapos; similarly the two handles of the
R.F. kylix E 4, with the signature of Thypheithides, do not belong to
the vase; but these may both be modern restorations. The large casks of
coarse and unglazed ware (p????) were also repaired with leaden cramps.
“The casks of the ill-clad Cynic,” says the Roman satirist, “do not
burn; should you break one of them, another house will be made by
to-morrow, or the same will continue to serve when repaired with
lead.”[493] Aristophanes puts into the mouth of his old litigant turned
_roué_ a popular story of Sybaris which alludes to the use of bronze
rivets. A woman of that city broke an earthen pot, which was
represented as screaming out, and calling for witnesses to prove how
badly it had been treated. “By Persephone!” exclaims the dame, “were
you to leave off bawling for witnesses, and make haste to buy a copper
clamp (?p?desµ??) to rivet yourself with, you would show more
sense.”[494]

                  *       *       *       *       *

After noting the chief uses of Greek vases it is necessary to give some
account of the different shapes, and to identify the recorded names as
far as possible with the various kinds actually found.

The subject is, however, one of great difficulty, and it is impossible
to attain to scientific accuracy, owing to the differences of time
between the authors by whom they are mentioned, the difficulty of
explaining types by verbal descriptions, and the ambiguity often caused
by the ancient practice of describing a vase of one shape by the name
of another.

A study of any collection of Greek vases will make it apparent that
there is a great variety in the forms of the different periods. This is
especially marked in the earliest ages of Greece, in which the variety
is almost endless, and the adoption and development of certain
recognised forms practically unknown. It must therefore be evident that
the statements of ancient writers must always be used with caution, and
that a shape described by an early writer must not be taken as
representing the same in a later period, even if the same word be used,
or _vice versa_. For instance, the d?pa? ?µf???pe???? of Homer, which
finds a curious parallel in the gold cup with the doves discovered by
Schliemann at Mycenae, is, whatever view we may take of the Homeric
civilisation, only an example of a passing fashion. Or again, many of
the drinking-cups described by Athenaeus in his eleventh book are
doubtless only instances of new experiments in pottery or metal-work
characteristic of the Hellenistic age, with its tendency to strive
after novelties. Many of his names are little more than nicknames for
familiar shapes, which enjoyed a temporary popularity.

Some information may be derived from the vases themselves by means of
inscriptions, specimens of which are given in Chapter XVII. Thus on the
François vase the three-handled pitcher used by Polyxena is inscribed
[?????], or “water-pot,” and enables us to apply the name hydria with
certainty to a three-handled vase, of which many black- and red-figured
specimens exist.[495] Then we have the _lekythos_ of Tataie, and the
_kylikes_ of Philto and Kephisophon,[496] which testify by inscriptions
to the name by which they were known. The names incised in _graffito_
on the feet of vases[497] are a more doubtful source of evidence,
inasmuch as they may refer either to mixed batches of vases or to the
names of measures of capacity.

Examples of cursory mention of names in the ancient writers, such as
Aristophanes, are innumerable, but seldom explicit, and the scholia on
these writers are hardly more useful, inasmuch as the grammarians
probably knew little more about obsolete shapes than we do ourselves,
and their commentaries have little critical weight. The _loci classici_
on the subject are the book of Athenaeus already referred to,[498] in
which he gives a list of over one hundred names, with more or less full
explanation and commentary, most of the forms being apparently
varieties of drinking-cups, and the _Onomasticon_ of Pollux.[499]
Notices of vases are also to be found in the lexicographers, such as
Hesychius and Suidas, and the _Etymologicum Magnum_.

In the early days of modern archaeology the first to propose an
identification of the shapes of vases was Panofka,[500] whose fanciful
and uncritical lucubrations were shortly afterwards combated by
Letronne[501] and Gerhard,[502] the latter of whom introduced a more
scientific method of criticism and classification, though his results
cannot be considered as final. Other writers were Müller,[503]
Thiersch,[504] Ussing,[505] Krause,[506] and Jahn,[507] of whom Ussing
followed practically on Gerhard’s lines but with more success; Krause,
though exhaustive, is on the whole uncritical; and Jahn has treated the
subject with his wonted conciseness and sobriety. Of late years little
attention has been paid to it, principally, no doubt, for the reason
that so many conventional names have been generally accepted for the
ordinary shapes by archaeologists, who have recognised the fact that it
will never be possible to treat the subject with scientific
accuracy.[508]

The classification of the shapes of vases has usually been undertaken
on the lines of distinguishing their main uses, such as (1) those in
which food or liquids were preserved; (2) those in which liquids were
mixed or cooked; (3) those by means of which liquids were poured out or
food distributed; (4) drinking-cups; (5) other vases for the use of the
table or toilet. Thus we have the pithos and amphora for storing wine,
the krater for mixing it, the psykter for cooling it, the kyathos for
ladling it out, and the oinochoë or prochoos for pouring it out; the
hydria was used for fetching water from the well. Of smaller vases, the
names for drinking-cups are innumerable, but the phiale, for instance,
was employed chiefly for pouring libations; while dishes and plates are
represented by the lekane, tryblion, pinax, and so on. The pyxis was
used by women at their toilet, and the lekythos, alabastron, and askos
for holding oil and unguents. There is an interesting passage in
Athenaeus (iv. 142 D)[509] which gives a list of the vases required for
use at a banquet: “And on the tripod was placed a bronze wine-cooler
(???t??) and a ??d?? (bucket) and a silver s?af??? holding two kotylae
(one pint), and a ladle (??a???); and the wine-jug (?p???s??) was of
bronze, but nobody was offered drink unless he asked for it; and one
ladleful was given out before the meal.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

For the purposes of this work it is hoped that the usual method of
classification indicated above will be found sufficient, supplemented
by the descriptions of Athenaeus and other writers, where any details
can be obtained; but it is obvious that a really critical treatment of
the subject should be chronological, with endeavours to trace the first
appearance and development of each type. In the present state of our
knowledge, however, it would seem impossible to do so with success.

We begin our description of the vases of the Greeks with an account of
the large vases of rough manufacture calculated to hold great
quantities of wine, water, or food. The chief vase of this class is the
=Pithos= or cask (Lat. _dolium_), a vase of gigantic size, found both
in Italy and Greece.[510] They are shaped like enormous barrels, with
bulging bodies and wide mouths, and answer to the modern hogshead or
pipe. When full, the casks were closed with a circular stone, or with a
cover of clay. They were used to hold honey, wine, and figs, and were
usually kept half-buried in the earth.[511] They were sufficiently
capacious to hold a man, and the famous “tub” of Diogenes was of this
form. On a lamp in the British Museum and other monuments[512] he is
represented appearing from one, presumably on the occasion of his
interview with Alexander. In the vase-paintings Eurystheus takes refuge
in a pithos from Herakles when he brings the Erymanthian boar,[513] and
the same shape of vase is represented as holding the wine of the
Centaurs and the water drawn by the Danaids.[514] The “box” of Pandora
was in reality a large jar of this kind, as we learn from Hesiod.[515]
It required great skill to make these vases, whence a Greek proverb
characterised an ambitious but inexperienced man as “one who began with
a cask” (?? p??? t?? ?e?aµe?a? µa????e??).[516] They were not made on
the wheel but by a peculiar process, which is described as plastering
the clay round a framework of wood, called ????aß??[517]; it appears to
have been made of vertical boards ranged in a circle, like a tub.

[Illustration: FIG. 21. PITHOS FROM KNOSSOS.]

The British Museum possesses two or three p???? of exceptional size,
ornamented with bands of geometrical patterns in relief, which were
obtained from Mr. (now Sir A.) Biliotti’s excavations at Ialysos in
Rhodes, and belong to the Mycenaean period. In 1900 Mr. Arthur Evans,
among the remains of the Minoan palace at Knossos in Crete, came upon a
courtyard round which stood a number of similar p????, with decorations
of a Mycenaean character (see Fig. 21).[518] These may be considered to
belong to the middle of the second millennium B.C., and it is therefore
evident that the p???? may claim an antiquity second to none among
forms of Greek vases.

Among examples of later date may be mentioned the large series recently
found in Thera by German explorers, some plain, others with painted
geometrical decoration; they are partly of native make, partly
importations from Crete, and date from the seventh century B.C.[519]
Dr. Dörpfeld found examples of p???? in the remains of the earlier
cities at Hissarlik, from the second to the seventh layers. These were
used for keeping all sorts of liquids and solids, and also apparently
formed part of the cooking apparatus.[520] Others were found in the
excavations of Mr. J. Brunton on the site of Dardanus in the Troad;
they were of pale red clay, with a stone cover. In excavating between
Balaclava and Sevastopol Colonel Munroe discovered no less than
sixteen, about 4 ft. 4 in. in height, within a circular building,
apparently a storehouse; they were also of pale red ware. One had
incised upon its lip [???? ????], apparently indicating its price.
Similar p???? have been found in Athens, some having fractures joined
by leaden rivets. Large p???? with archaic reliefs have been found in
Crete, Rhodes, Sicily, and Etruria (at Cervetri); they are imitated
from metal vases, with designs of Oriental character.[521]

Perhaps of all the ancient vases the best known is the =Amphora=
(?µf??e?? or ?µf?f??e??), which was used for a variety of domestic and
commercial purposes. So numerous are the vases of this form, found all
over the Greek world, that they merit a lengthy description. They were
principally used for wine, but also for corn, honey, oil, and other
substances,[522] and to the use of the word as a measure of capacity we
have already alluded. It should be borne in mind that the conventional
use of the word _amphora_ in speaking of the painted Greek vases
implies a quite different form from the plain wine-amphorae, which were
neither painted nor varnished; the type of vase is the same, but the
painted examples are smaller and stouter, with a proper foot. For the
present we confine our description to the unadorned amphora of commerce.

Besides the two handles from which the word derives its name,[523] the
wine-amphora (Fig. 22.) is distinguished by its long egg-shaped body,
narrow cylindrical neck, and pointed base; this form is often known as
_diota_ (the Latin equivalent). The base is sometimes supplied with a
ring to stand on, but is more usually pointed, in order to be easily
fixed in the earth in cellars. The mouth was sealed by means of a
conical cover terminating in a boss.

[Illustration: FIG. 22. GREEK WINE-JARS (BRITISH MUSEUM).]

Remains of these amphorae have been discovered not only in Greece
itself, but also wherever the Greek commerce and settlements extended,
as in Alexandria, Kertch (Panticapaeum), Corfu, Rhodes, Sicily, and
Asia Minor. They appear to have been used at a very early period, plain
specimens of red ware being found not only in the early Greek tombs,
like that of Menekrates in Corfu (p. 54), but even in tombs of the
Bronze Age period, as in Cyprus. The typical long shape, however, did
not come into fashion until about 300 B.C., when the island of Rhodes
was a great trading centre, carrying on an active commerce all over the
Mediterranean. Amphorae of this form are represented on the coins of
Chios and Thasos with reference to their trade in wine, and on the
Athenian silver tetradrachms which belong to the period subsequent to
about 220 B.C.; they are shown on the reverse, lying horizontally, with
an owl above. In this case the reference may be either to the large
Attic trade in oil or to the use of the amphora for voting at the
election of magistrates (see p. 167).

The most interesting feature of the wine-amphorae is the device or
impression stamped on the handles either in a circular medallion or an
oblong depression. This was done by means of a stone or bronze stamp,
while the clay was still moist. They are found in all parts of the
ancient world, but the greater number can be traced to a few places of
origin, of which the most important are: Rhodes, Knidos, Thasos, Paros,
and Olbia in Southern Russia. As regards the stamps, the usage differs
at each centre; but apart from them the handles can be distinguished by
their shapes and material, as will be seen in the subsequent
description.

The Rhodian amphorae, of which large numbers have been found at
Alexandria as well as in the island itself, were of a very pure and
tenacious clay, with a fracture as sharp as that of delf. The colour is
pale, deepening to a salmon hue. The numerous separate handles which
have also been found have all belonged to the same form of amphora,
with long square-shouldered handles, as on the Athenian and Chian
coins. An entire vase, but without a stamp,[524] which was brought from
Rhodes, was 40 in. in height, and the height of the handles alone was
10 in., the upper part attached to the top of the mouth being 3 in.
long. This is a typical instance for the shape. The seal when found is
impressed on the upper part of the handle, the size of the label being
generally about 1½ in. or 1¾ in. long, by ? in. wide, except when they
are oval or circular. At Alexandria eight distinct varieties of handles
were found, broken from amphorae of different countries, but only one
inscribed; the base also assumed various forms.

In the Rhodian amphorae two stamps are in use, a principal and an
accessory one (Fig. 23._a_).[525] The former has a device of the head
of Helios, the Sun-God, or the emblematic rose, both of which types
occur on the coins; it is accompanied by an inscription, in the form
?p? t?? de????, sometimes explicitly described as ?e????, _i.e._ in the
year of the eponymous priest of the Sun. This is followed by the name
of a Rhodian month. The accessory stamp contains the name of a person,
usually in the genitive. The months belong to the Doric calendar, and
are as follows: Thesmophorios, Theudaisios, Pedageitnyos, Diosthyos,
Badromios, Sminthios, Artamitios, Agrianios, Hyakinthios, Panamos,
Dalios, Karneios, and the second Panamos, an intercalary month.[526]
The object of the stamps is involved in obscurity, but they were
probably intended to certify that the amphora (which was also a
measure) held the proper quantity. It is clear that they could not have
been intended to attest the age of the wine, as the vessel might be
used for any sort, and the stamps bear the name of every month in the
year.

[Illustration:

  From _Dumont_.
  FIG. 23. AMPHORA-STAMPS FROM RHODES.
]

Other handles of Rhodian amphorae, stamped with an oblong cartouche or
label, may be divided into two classes: (1) Those inscribed with the
name of a magistrate and an emblem. The latter resembled the “adjuncts”
found on the coins of some Greek cities, but it is uncertain whether
they were selected on any fixed principle, or merely adopted from
caprice. They may perhaps allude to the deity whom the magistrate
particularly honoured as the patron god of his tribe or village. The
same symbol was, however, often used by many individuals, and on the
whole the number known is not large. (2) Those bearing the name of a
magistrate, accompanied by that of a month of the Doric calendar, but
without any emblem (Fig. 23._b_).

Many handles of amphorae from Knidos have been found on different
sites. Their clay is coarser than the Rhodian, its colour darker and
duller, and the amphorae differ also somewhat in form, nor are they of
so early a date, being mostly as late as the Roman Empire. The stamps
on the Cnidian amphorae, like those of Rhodes, are inscribed with the
name of the eponymous magistrate, and also with that of the wine-grower
or exporter of the produce, which is always marked as Cnidian. The
stamps show a great variety in the matter of emblems. Remains of
Cnidian amphorae have been found in Sicily, at Athens, Alexandria, and
Olbia. The palaeography of the inscriptions covers a period of two
centuries, from Augustus to Marcus Aurelius, or even later.

Numerous examples have been found of handles of amphorae, in which the
celebrated wine of Thasos was exported to places such as Thasos and
Olbia. The stamps are nearly square, with a device in the middle, the
inscription [T?S?O?], and the name of an official. The names are
usually in the nominative, but in one instance at least the genitive is
used. The symbols include an amphora, kneeling archer, cornucopia,
dolphin, etc. (Fig. 24).[527] The known stamps of Paros are few in
number; they are simply inscribed [????O?], which in one instance is
written retrograde.[528]

Handles inscribed with the name of an aedile (?st???µ??) and of another
person, probably a magistrate, have been found on various sites in the
Crimea and Southern Russia, principally at Olbia. At Panticapaeum
(Kertch) two amphorae were found with stamps across the neck, thus:

                          EUARCHO   EPI KALLIA
                          ARISTON   EOPAMONOS

the upper name being that of the magistrate.[529] These vases appear to
have been made on the spot.

[Illustration:

  From _Dumont_.
  FIG. 24. AMPHORA-STAMPS FROM THASOS.
]

Stoddart also mentions amphora-handles as having come from
Corinth,[530] with names which can be traced to the time of the Roman
dominion. Falkner found at Pompeii an amphora with a Greek inscription
of three lines painted in red and black, with the name of Menodotos and
the letters KOR. OPT., which _may_ mean “the best Corcyraean
brand.”[531] A bibliography of the subject is appended below.[532]

Among painted vases the amphora holds a high place, especially in the
black-figure period, during which it was most prominent. It is
distinguished from the plain type, as already pointed out, by the
proportions of the body, as well as by the graceful curve of the
handles and the flat circular foot. The variations in its form at
different places and periods are so marked that they have led to the
adoption of qualifying adjectives for each kind. Although these names
cannot now be accepted in a strict sense, they are sometimes useful as
conventional expressions. We proceed to describe these in detail.

(1) The origin of the Greek amphora is clearly to be sought in the
pithos of primitive times, as may be seen in the vases of the Melian
and Proto-Attic classes, and in the early vases with reliefs from
Boeotia, Crete, Thera, and elsewhere. It is not found in the Mycenaean
style, the large vases of which come under the heading of the krater
(see below); and its appearance in Greece dates from the developed
stage of the Geometrical period. The earliest specimens among the
painted vases are virtually small pithoi, characterised by a long
cylindrical neck, and large elaborate handles obviously imitating metal
(see p. 495). Of this type are several of the Boeotian Geometrical and
Proto-Attic vases discussed in Chapter VII.,[533] and the Boeotian
vases with reliefs.[534] Among the Proto-Attic vases found at Vourva a
development occurs, in which the neck is greatly elongated, and the
body becomes exceedingly slim, while the handles are simplified into
plain flat bands united to the neck by bars of clay (see Fig. 89, p.
299). This form is found still further developed in the
prothesis-amphorae of the B.F. period[535]; but these are comparatively
rare, and the more normal evolution of the amphora with cylindrical
neck is to be traced in the varieties (2) and (6) described below.

[Illustration: FIG. 25. “TYRRHENIAN” AMPHORA.]

(2) The early amphorae preceding the ordinary B.F. Athenian types were
divided by Gerhard into two classes, “Egyptian” and “Tyrrhenian.”[536]
He describes the former as a vase with tolerably pronounced curve of
body, entirely covered with horizontal bands of figures; the latter as
of similar form, but with decoration confined to a panel on either
side. As regards shape, therefore, the two are actually one, and may be
regarded as such for our present purpose; but it is curious to note
that the particular class called “Egyptian” by Gerhard has since his
time been generally known as “Tyrrhenian,” while his “Tyrrhenian” class
has now received, from the peculiar mannerisms of the paintings, the
name of “affected” vases.[537] At all events the word is convenient to
adhere to for the description of this particular shape (Fig. 25), with
its long, egg-shaped body, the vertical section of which is almost an
ellipse, a shape common to all early B.F. fabrics—Athenian, Rhodian,
Ionic, and Corinthian—but best illustrated by the “Corintho-Attic”
class described by Thiersch.[538] It is seldom found in purely Attic
examples, and disappears after the middle of the sixth century.

[Illustration: FIG. 26. PANATHENAIC AMPHORA.]

(3) Gerhard’s next class is that of the Panathenaic amphorae, which
have a long body shaped something like a top, and tapering sharply
downwards; the mouth, handles, and neck are small, as is also the foot
(Fig. 26). It is so called as being the characteristic form of the
earlier (sixth-century) Panathenaic prize-vases, but is also
occasionally found in the ordinary fabrics. This type, together with
the two following examples, not mentioned explicitly by Gerhard or the
other early writers, form the class of “black-bodied” amphorae, as they
may conveniently be termed, in order to distinguish those with
panel-decoration from those in which the body is entirely covered with
red glaze (see below).

(4) The second variety of “black-bodied” amphora (Fig. 27.) is closely
akin to the Panathenaic, but the body is better proportioned. It is
characterised by the wide mouth in the form of a thick ring, the
cylindrical handles, and the concave curve of the shoulder. From the
style of the paintings it is probable that this variety must be placed
early in the black-figure period.

[Illustration: FIG. 27. PANEL-AMPHORA.]

(5) This type, on the other hand, is later in the period, being
developed out of the last, from which it is marked off only by the form
of the handles, which are broad and flanged, and often decorated with
patterns. These vases are mostly of large size, and are transitional,
some R.F. varieties being known. The paintings on them are in the style
of Exekias, Andokides, and Euthymides (see for an example Plates XXXI.,
XXXII.).

(6) The shape of the “red-bodied” amphora (Fig. 28) is peculiar to the
black-figure period.[539] Its characteristic features are the straight,
cylindrical neck, with its chain of lotos-and-honeysuckle, the width of
the shoulder, and the ribbed handles, formed from moulds in two or
three parallel pieces. Artistically it is far superior to the
black-bodied, and includes some of the finest specimens of B.F.
painting (as in the vases of Exekias), while the decorative element
reaches the perfection of beauty and symmetry.

[Illustration: FIG. 28. RED-BODIED AMPHORA.]

(7) The red-bodied amphora seems to have been the prototype of what is
the most characteristic form of the red-figure period—the so-called
“Nolan” amphora (Fig. 29).[540] These have been largely, but not
exclusively, found at Nola, whither they seem to have been imported in
large numbers from Greece. The whole vase is covered with black, and
the decoration confined to one or two figures each side, while the
elegant and beautiful outline, the lustre of the varnish, and the
restraint of the designs combine to render these perhaps the most
beautiful products of Athenian ceramic art. The handles are sometimes
four-sided, more often ribbed, and sometimes formed of two twisted
strands, produced by rolling up the soft paste; the general outline is
that of the last class, but the proportions are far more slender and
graceful.

[Illustration: FIG. 29. “NOLAN” AMPHORA.]

(8) The Apulian amphora (Fig. 30) illustrates the form which, though
generally adopted in Apulia, may have had its origin at Athens, as it
is adopted for the fourth-century Panathenaic amphorae.[541] It is
distinguished by its great size and egg-shaped body; the mouth is thick
and high, spreading out like an inverted cone, and the neck is not
cylindrical, but merges into the shoulder. A variety of the Apulian
amphora, hardly common enough to form a separate class, was formerly
known as the “candelabrum-amphora,” from its resemblance to an
incense-burner (an object wrongly interpreted formerly as a
_candelabrum_, or lamp-stand). Its peculiarities are the cylindrical
body, tall neck, and elaborate handles in the form of double
scrolls.[542]

[Illustration: FIG. 30. APULIAN AMPHORA.]

(9) The Campanian amphora is derived directly from the “Nolan,” and is
in fact a local adaptation, but it was chiefly manufactured at
Cumae.[543] It generally has twisted handles, and is painted in
polychrome; the proportions are somewhat more elongated than those of
the “Nolan” class.

(10) A rare variety of the amphora is sometimes found in the red-figure
period, with large spheroidal body and pointed base, intended to be
placed in a separate stand. The conventional name of _diota_ is
sometimes given to this form, from its imitation of the pointed base of
the wine-amphora.[544]

(11) The last variety of the amphora which calls for consideration is
the wide-bellied type, usually called (on very slight authority) a
_pelike_, pe??k? (Fig. 31).[545] The name was invented by Gerhard, and
has been generally adopted since, but is only to be regarded as a
conventional term. This form, which swells out towards the base, and
has no stem or neck, is very rarely found before the fifth
century,[546] but is common in the R.F. period, and in the Apulian
style, in which its proportions are usually more slender.

[Illustration: FIG. 31. SO-CALLED “PELIKE.”]

The amphora when complete usually had a cover of clay, either coated
with a plain black varnish or decorated with bands and patterns; it was
lifted by means of a central knob. An amphora in the Berlin Museum
(_Cat._ 1860) has a double cover, the inner one being of alabaster.

Of the other names which seem to denote vases adapted for containing
and storing wine or other commodities, the most important is the
=Stamnos= (st?µ???), used for holding wine and oil. It is mentioned by
Pollux[547] in his list of wine-jars, and he quotes a line from
Aristophanes about “a stamnos of Chian wine arriving.” The diminutives
staµ???? and staµ?????? are also found, and Aristophanes speaks of a
“small Thasian stamnos of wine.”[548] The amphora is defined in the
_Etymologicum Magnum_ as “a two-eared staµ????.” It has been generally
identified with a form well known in the R.F. period, but only found in
that style: a spherical jar with short thick neck and small
side-handles, of which some very beautiful specimens exist (Fig. 32).
The word is still in use in modern Greek.

[Illustration: FIG. 32. STAMNOS.]

The ß???? is described by Hesychios as a st?µ??? with ears, and by
Eustathius as a vessel holding wine[549]; it was also used for figs and
salted food.[550] It is probably only another name for the
st?µ???st?µ???, but it seems to be inaccurately described by
Athenaeus[551] as “a saucer-shaped drinking-cup” (f?a??de? p?t?????).
It was apparently identical with the ????,[552] a word used by
Aristophanes,[553] but more commonly by Roman writers in its Latin form
_orca_.

[Illustration: FIG. 33. SO-CALLED “LEKANE.”]

The names of Apulian stamnos or ?e???? have at different times been
given to a late form of painted vase found in Southern Italy, with high
or low stem, upright handles, and cover, which latter often takes an
elaborate form, being surmounted by one or more small vases, also with
handles (Fig. 33.). The word ?e????,[554] however, seems to indicate a
large bowl rather than a covered jar, and no satisfactory name has as
yet been found. A similar but flatter form of vase, like a covered bowl
or dish, has been named ?e????, ?epast?, or covered pyxis, but no name
is satisfactory.

The ?a????? or ?a????? seems to have been a narrow-necked jar of
considerable size. Athenaeus[555] says the word represented a Greek
measure, equivalent to twelve Attic ??t??a?, or six pints, and that it
was in use at Patrae. The word is used by Plutarch for the jar in which
the stork offered entertainment to the fox[556]; it frequently appears
in the Latin form _lagena_ (see Chapter XXI.). A wicker-covered ?a?????
was known as a p?t???.[557]

Another form of the same class is the ??d?s, with its diminutive
?ad?s???, which is represented by the Latin _situla_, or bucket, the
latter word being the one usually employed by archaeologists. It is a
form easily to be recognised in Greek art, but is more usually found in
metal-work, _e.g._ in Etruscan and Italian bronzes, than in
pottery.[558] The painted situlae, of which a few late examples from
Italian tombs exist, are obviously direct imitations of the metal
buckets, and in some cases actually have movable bronze handles
attached. The situla appears to have been used not only for keeping
wine in the cellar, but for serving it up at banquets[559]; the word is
also used by Aristophanes for a voting-urn and a well-bucket.[560] In
Latin the uses were probably distinguished, _cadus_ denoting a
wine-jar, _situla_ a water-bucket. Athenaeus obviously goes astray in
regarding it as a drinking-cup.

A vase which was used almost exclusively for carrying water was the
=Hydria=, as is implied by its name (?d??a, from ?d??). Its most
essential characteristic is the possession of three handles, a large
one at the back for carrying when empty, and two small horizontal
handles at the sides for carrying when full. The shape of the body
varies at different periods; in the B.F. period the shoulder is flat
and marked off by a sharp angle from the body (Fig. 34); but about the
beginning of the fifth century this is replaced by a form with more
rounded outline and smaller handle at the back, generally known for the
sake of distinction as a _kalpis_ (Fig. 35). In the earlier variety (of
which some R.F. examples are known) there are always two subjects, one
forming a frieze on the shoulder, the other treated more in the manner
of a metope on the body; they are invariably enclosed in frames or
panels, as on the “black-bodied” amphorae. Sometimes a third subject in
the form of a frieze of animals is added below. In the earlier stages
of the B.F. period this form is seldom found, except in a class known
as the “Caeretan hydriae,” distinguished (as far as concerns their
shape) by their round, plump body, as also by the florid character of
their ornament and curious treatment of subjects (p. 353). These vases
were closely copied by the Etruscans. The _kalpis_ form sometimes
occurs with black figures, but only in small late specimens, chiefly
found in Rhodes. In the vases of Southern Italy the _kalpis_ is fairly
popular, but the body is more cylindrical and the foot higher.

[Illustration: FIG. 34. HYDRIA.]

Any doubt that might have existed as to the identification of the ?d??a
is solved by the appearance of the word inscribed over the pitcher
which Polyxena dropped in her flight from Achilles, on the François
vase. In a scene very common on B.F. hydriae, which represents women
drawing water at a fountain, this form of vase is invariably depicted.
The word seldom occurs in Greek literature, but Kallimachos speaks of
?a?p?de? placed on the roof of the Parthenon (?) at Athens, not, he
says, by way of ornament, but as prizes of wrestlers.[561] Hence the
idea was conceived by Panofka that Panathenaic prize-vases were of this
form.

[Illustration: FIG. 35. KALPIS.]

Pollux (x. 74) thinks that the hydria was also a wine-vase, and
suggests its identity with the p??µ????, a vase with broad base used in
the Mysteries; but Athenaeus[562] implies that this was used for
pouring, and it must therefore have been some kind of jug. The ???p??
is actually identified with the ?d??a by Aristophanes, as may be seen
by a comparison of two lines in the _Lysistrata_.[563] From a passage
in Isocrates[564] it would appear that the hydria was used as a
voting-urn or ballot-box, but the ??d?? was more generally used for
this purpose. That the amphora was also so used we know from Athenian
coins.

The next class to be considered is that of vases employed for mixing
wine and water for drinking, for which the generic name is that of
??at?? (from ?e?????µ?, “I mix”). Before discussing this form, however,
allusion must be made to a vessel which is variously described as a
_hydria_ or a _krater_, and is therefore a link between the two
varieties; it was at any rate pre-eminently a water-jar, and was known
as a ???ss?? (connected with Fr. _cruche_ = Eng. “crock”). We have no
indications of its form except that it had two handles[565]; Pollux
(viii. 66) ranks it with the ?d??a and ???p?? as a water-vessel.[566]
It was also used for holding ashes,[567] and Plutarch enumerates it
among the vessels in the bath of Darius.[568] Of the same character was
perhaps the ??d????? or ??d?????, described as a water-pot.[569]
Athenaeus also mentions a p??a???, or wooden vessel of the krater type,
as used in Attica.[570]

The =Krater= is distinguished from the amphora by its larger body,
wider mouth, and smaller handles. It was often placed on a stand,
called ?p???at?????, or ?p???at???d???,[571] which was either of
pottery or metal such as bronze. This either took the form of a hollow
cylindrical base, painted with subjects, or of an elaborately moulded
stem with egg-and-tongue and other patterns.[572] It is constantly
mentioned in Homer, but the kraters standing in the halls of the great
palaces, as in that of Odysseus, were made of gold or silver. It is on
the average the largest of all Greek vases (except the pithos), some of
the later Apulian specimens (of which F 278 in the B.M. is one)
reaching a height of about four feet; the ordinary examples have a
capacity of three or four gallons. The names Argolic, Lesbian,
Laconian, Corinthian, and Thericleian are applied to it by various
ancient authors.[573]

In the different fabrics of Greek pottery it takes several distinct
forms, to which convenient descriptive names have been given by Italian
dealers, and some attempt has been made to identify names given by
classical authors as forms of the krater, but without any success. The
Italian names, however, which will be mentioned in due course, are
somewhat cumbersome for English use.

Among Mycenaean vases there is a variety almost confined to Cyprus, to
which the name of krater may fairly be given.[574] Its chief
characteristics are a wide spheroidal body, hardly contracted at the
neck (which in some varieties is non-existent), flat vertical
side-handles, and a high stem. We hardly meet with this form again
until the end of the Corinthian style, when it suddenly leaps into
popularity.[575] The form in which it appears recalls, though it can
hardly be imitated from, the Mycenaean krater, but the stem disappears,
and the body is in section about two-thirds of a circle.[576] It is
clearly a local invention, and on the evidence of finds at Syracuse,
its first appearance may be traced to the first half of the seventh
century. Its distinguishing feature, however, is in the handles, each
of which is composed of two short vertical bars, sometimes meeting in
an arch, supporting a flat square piece formed by a projection from the
flat broad rim, which is generally decorated. From the columnar
appearance of these handles, the type has received the name of _vaso a
colonnette_, which at all events is a more accurate description than
the name ?e??ß? which, first proposed by Gerhard, has been generally
employed by archaeologists, on what grounds it is not clear. This word,
as described by Athenaeus, is clearly intended to imply a
_drinking-cup_ of some kind[577]; he quotes from Anakreon (_frag._ 63,
Bergk), who speaks of drinking its contents at one draught (?µ?st??).
On the other hand he quotes the authority of Pamphilos for identifying
it with the ?e?µ?p?t??, or “water-heater,” a kind of kettle. The
probability is that it was a general and loosely-employed word.

[Illustration: FIG. 36. KRATER WITH COLUMN-HANDLES.]

The column-handled krater is also found in the Naukratis wares of the
sixth century, as well as in the imitations of Corinthian fabrics in
which the Campana collection of the Louvre is so rich; the clay, style,
and inscriptions of the latter clearly show their Corinthian origin,
apart from the form. This krater is often decorated with friezes of
figures (as in the famous Amphiaraos krater, p. 319). In the few
existing Attic examples with black figures the subjects are in framed
panels. This form, after dying out before the end of the sixth century,
is revived towards the middle of the fifth in the later R.F. fabrics,
but in a much altered form, which gives greater prominence to the
columnar character of the handles. The neck is higher and narrower, and
the handles consequently lengthened, the square tops being much
diminished, and the body also takes a narrower and straighter form. In
the fabrics of Southern Italy this development is even more strongly
marked, and the elongated neck is adorned with an ivy-wreath in a
panel; this type enjoyed some popularity both in Apulia and Lucania.
The system of panel-decoration is employed throughout in all these
cases.

[Illustration: FIG. 37. VOLUTE-HANDLED KRATER.]

The only other form of krater found in the B.F. period—and that but
rarely—is that known as _volute-handled_ (_a rotelle_), from the large
handles reaching above the lip and curved round in a scroll (Fig. 37).
It has an egg-shaped body and large neck. The best and earliest example
is the François vase (p. 370), from which it may be clearly seen that
the form is derived from the columnar-handled krater. The British
Museum also possesses a fine example signed by Nikosthenes, with a
design in a frieze on the neck (B 364). The same shape and method of
decoration appear in some fine examples of the severe R.F. style (cf.
B.M. E 468, 469). During the R.F. period, two entirely new forms of
krater suddenly appear, known respectively as the _vaso a calice_ and
the _vaso a campana_, or “calyx-krater” and “bell-krater”; the former
is first used by Euphronios.[578] These names give a very accurate
description of the forms, the one being like the opening calyx of a
flower, the other like an inverted bell (Figs. 38, 39). In each the lip
projects above the body, the neck having entirely disappeared, while
the handles of the calyx-krater drop to the lower part of the vase, and
those of the bell-krater are attached horizontally to the sides. Both
types of handle are evidently adapted to carrying full vessels, like
the side-handles of the hydria. The name of ???ßaf?? was given by
Gerhard[579] to the bell-krater, again without any real authority, and
probably owing to an error, from finding the name scratched underneath
one example. Comparison, however, with similar inscriptions (see
Chapter XVII.) shows clearly that the ???ßaf?? was a small measure,
less even than a ??a???, or ladleful. Athenaeus (xi. 494 B) is very
explicit on this point. He derives the name from ????, vinegar, which
liquid the vessel was used to contain, and describes it as e?d??
??????? µ?????. It was therefore a small cup of some kind (see p. 194).

          [Illustration]                       [Illustration]
       FIG. 38. CALYX-KRATER                FIG. 39. BELL-KRATER

In Southern Italy the krater holds the same position as the amphora of
the B.F. period.[580] The calyx- and bell-kraters are the two forms
chiefly affected in the transition period when Athenian artists were
working in Italy, or Italian artists directly under the influence of
Athenian (see p. 465), but they are also found among the purely local
fabrics, especially those of Cumae and Paestum (_ibid._). The
calyx-krater seems to have been reserved for the better and more
carefully-executed specimens,[581] and the Italian bell-kraters often
have a top-heavy effect from the greater height of their stems.

In Apulia (and occasionally also in Lucania—the Campanian potters did
not affect large vases) the volute-handled krater once more appears, in
great magnificence. Not only is the total size and bulk increased, but
the neck is lengthened and the handles are often treated with great
elaboration of detail, ending below in swans’ necks spreading over the
vase. In Apulia the volutes are generally replaced by medallions
(whence the Italian name _vaso con maniche a mascheroni_) decorated
with Gorgons’ heads or figures, in relief, painted white, yellow, and
red. These vases are sometimes, but incorrectly, called amphorae; they
range from two to three or four feet in height. They are generally
painted from head to foot with subjects, often of a sepulchral nature,
and were no doubt largely made for use at funeral ceremonies. They are
more fully described in Chapter XI.

[Illustration: FIG. 40. LUCANIAN KRATER.]

The last variety of krater (Fig. 40) is formed by a peculiar type of
vase, apparently devised by the Iapygian aborigines of Southern
Italy,[582] which has a wide mouth and sloping shoulder, and sometimes
a high neck. Its peculiarity is that it has four handles, two upright
and two horizontal, to the sides of which large discs are attached,
whence its Italian name is _vaso con maniche a rotelle_, from the wheel
or rosette patterns painted on the discs. This feature caused Panofka
to give it the name of ?est????, with reference to the famous
four-handled cup of Nestor (_Il._ xi. 632). It need hardly be pointed
out that there can be little in common between this form and the
drinking-cup used by the Homeric hero, in spite of the fact that the
latter was too heavy for an ordinary man to lift. We need not suppose
that Nestor’s cup (concerning which see below, p. 181) was larger than
an ordinary “loving-cup,” and the poet was probably guilty of a
pardonable exaggeration. As a painted vase, this four-handled krater is
peculiar to Lucania, and it is interesting to note that it sometimes
appears depicted on Lucanian vases as used in daily life.[583]

[Illustration: FIG. 41. PSYKTER.]

Closely related to the krater is the ???t?? or ???e??, a wine-cooler
(from ????, “cool”), which was used for cooling wine by means of snow
or cold water.[584] The extant specimens are but few in number and vary
in form. The British Museum possesses a very remarkable specimen in the
form of a B.F. panel amphora (B 148),[585] with double walls and
bottom, and a large spout on one side, through which the snow or cold
water was introduced into the outer space; it was afterwards withdrawn
through an aperture in the bottom.[586] Similar vases in the
“Chalcidian” style are also known. After the beginning of the R.F.
period a new type was introduced in the shape of a vessel with a short
neck, the body of which bulges out towards its base, and is supported
on a high stem; it generally has two small eared handles (Fig. 41).
Several R.F. examples are known, of which two are in the British
Museum,[587] and three or four in the Louvre; the British Museum also
possesses a late B.F. specimen (B 299). The designs are painted in a
frieze round the vase.

The ???at?f????, or vessel for holding unmixed wine, seems to have been
another name for the ???t??; Pollux (vi. 90) says the difference was
that it was supported on small knobs (_lit._ small knucklebones)
instead of a stem.

[Illustration: FIG. 42. DEINOS OR LEBES.]

Another name identified in antiquity with the ???t?? is that of the
d???? (sometimes spelled de????); but the identity was more probably
one of usage than of form.[588] As to the latter, there is considerable
discrepancy in the accounts of the grammarians[589]; one calls it a
deep cup tapering down to a point; another, probably more correctly,
since it was certainly not a drinking-vessel, a clay vessel for wine
without a base, but rounded underneath. In virtue of this description
the name has usually been applied to a class of vase, commoner in the
earlier periods than the later, and more often found on Greek sites
than on Italian, which has a rounded base without foot, and no handles
(Fig. 42). These vases are found as early as the seventh century in
Greece, and were very common at Naukratis, appearing also in most of
the B.F. fabrics. That they were used to contain the ashes of the dead
is shown by the B.M. example already referred to (p. 146), which
belongs to the end of the R.F. period.[590] In Southern Italy this form
of vase is generally placed on a separate high moulded stem, and has a
cover with an ornamental knob. A variety with hemispherical cover
nearly equal in size to the vase itself has been identified with the
?µ?t?µ?? (“cut in half”), a form mentioned by Athenaeus.[591]

This type of vase has more usually been described by the name of ??ß??,
denoting a kettle or caldron; but though the form of the ??ß?? was
practically the same (as we may gather from the fact of its always
being placed on a tripod), the purpose for which it was used (_i.e._
for boiling water) and the fact that it was always of metal, suggest
that it is not such an appropriate name as d???? for this form of
painted vase. The ??ß?? is constantly mentioned in Homer, both as a
cooking-vessel and as a washing-basin.[592] Herodotos[593] says that
the Scythians used a ??ß?? for cooking flesh, which resembled the
Lesbian krater, but was much larger. It was also the vessel in which
the ram, and subsequently Pelias, were boiled by Medeia; and may be
seen depicted in several B.F. representations of that story.[594] A
golden lebes was placed at each angle of the temple of Zeus at
Olympia.[595] It is also the name of the vessel used by the Boeotians
in their ingenious contrivance at the siege of Delion.[596] To its use
as a cinerary urn in the tragic poets we have already alluded.

The ordinary name for a cooking-vessel of earthenware in Greece was
??t?a, answering to our “pot”: it was used both for water and for
solids, as well as for other domestic purposes. Children were exposed
in ??t?a?[597]; and a boy’s game called ??t???da is described by
Pollux[598]; it was apparently played in two ways, either by a boy
representing a ??t?a, who was pulled about by the other players until
he caught one, or by a boy carrying a pot, with some obscure reference
to the story of Midas. There were several proverbial expressions
connected with the ??t?a, such as p??????e?? ??t?a?, “to paint pots,”
expressive of useless labour, owing to the roughness of the ware; and
together with the ????, a vessel only known as a measure (12 kotylae or
5¾ pints), it played a part in the festival of the Anthesteria, one day
of which was known as ??t?a? ?a? ??e?, or “Pot-and-Pan Day.”[599] The
word ??t??p???, used by Hesiod[600] and Aristophanes,[601] seems merely
to denote a cooking-pot with feet. The p??a???? or ???ßa??? large clay
vessels used either as brasiers or for baking purposes, have been
already described in Chapter III.

A few other general words for cooking-vessels and domestic utensils may
also be mentioned here. The ?e?µa?t?? mentioned by Pollux[602] is
presumably identical with the ?e?µ?p?t?? and ??afa?a of Athenaeus (475
D, 783 F), the former, as its name implies, being a vessel in which hot
drinks were prepared. It seems to have been exclusively made of metal,
and may, indeed, only be another name for the ??ß??. It has, as we have
seen, been identified with the ?e??ß?. Pollux gives a list of vessels
used for warming water.[603]

The ??µ??, or strainer,[604] answers to the modern colander, and is
represented by a flat round vessel with long handle, of which some late
fictile examples exist.[605] It is mentioned among the vessels in the
Sigeian inscription,[606] but is there spelled ??µ??. Most of the
existing specimens are of bronze. The ???e??? mentioned by
Athenaeus[607] appears to have been a bowl used for washing cups. The
s??f? (“boat”) is a general term used in the classics for vessels of
varied import: basins, troughs, washing-tubs, bowls, etc.[608] It is
the name used in inscriptions relating to the Panathenaic festival to
describe the flat dishes or trays borne by the maidens who were called
Skaphephori in the procession, as represented on the Parthenon
frieze.[609] The diminutive form s??f??? or s?afe??? also occurs, and
is identified with ?a?p???. The ??µ??, generally used to denote a
mortar,[610] also signified a bowl,[611] and had the special
signification of the hollow bowl in which the priestess of Apollo sat
when delivering oracles from the Delphic tripod. It may here be noted
that the word t??p??? appears to be used in ancient writers[612] not
only for the stand which supported the ??ß?? and other vessels, but for
a vessel itself when thus supported on three feet. Most of the existing
tripods are made of bronze,[613] but one or two fictile examples are
known, including a very remarkable one in Berlin,[614] found at
Tanagra, and covered with archaic paintings in the B.F. method.

On bathing and washing vessels our best authority is Pollux (x. 63); it
is not, however, likely that they were often of earthenware. The
p?da??pt?? at all events was of metal; it is often seen on R.F. vases
with the subject of Theseus killing Procrustes.[615] Large vessels,
resembling modern baths, were known by the names of p?e???: and
?saµ?????[616]; the ???t?????, or laver, on a high stem, is frequently
represented on South Italian vases,[617] but is a purely decorative
adjunct. It is there painted white to indicate marble.

The ?e????[618] should also perhaps be included here, as according to
the literary accounts it was a basin used for washing feet or clothes,
or for vomiting. It also served the purpose of a mortar, and was used
in the game of kottabos. A method of divination sometimes practised was
known as ?e?a??µa?te?a and consisted in placing waxen images in a
lekane full of water, which became as it were animated and sank, thus
signifying the destruction of an enemy. In Pseudo-Callisthenes we read
how Nectanebos, the supposed father of Alexander, made use of this
procedure.[619]

[Illustration: FIG. 43. OINOCHOË (7TH CENTURY).]

The next series with which we have to deal is that of vases used for
pouring out wine and serving it at the table. They fall into two
classes: the wine-jug for pouring, and the ladle for filling it out of
the mixing-bowl. We begin with the series of wine-jugs, as being the
more important.

[Illustration: FIG. 44. OINOCHOË (5TH CENTURY).]

Of these the most conspicuous is the =Oinochoë= (???????, from ?????,
“wine,” and ???, “pour”), one of the most beautiful shapes among Greek
vases. It appears in several forms, but the name is generally
restricted to one, which corresponds most closely to the modern
beer-jug. It is found at all periods, and the form never varies to any
marked extent, except that the later examples are rather more graceful
than the earlier, and some of the fine R.F. specimens reach the
perfection of elegance in form and decoration (Fig. 44). Its chief
characteristic is the trefoil-shaped mouth, but this is not invariable,
many specimens having a plain circular lip. It is very commonly found
in the Rhodian wares of the seventh century, with designs in a
continuous frieze (Fig. 43); and a peculiar form appears in an Ionic
fabric (see page 359), with egg-shaped body and coarse designs. In the
B.F. period the subjects are nearly always in framed panels. Among the
R.F. vases of the fine style, many diminutive oinochoae occur, nearly
all of which were found at Athens, the subjects being those of children
playing with go-carts and other toys, and sometimes with jugs of the
same shape. As these appear to have been found in children’s tombs, it
is evident that these painted specimens were actually used as
playthings.[620]

The oinochoë is frequently represented in vase-paintings, chiefly in
scenes of libation, in which ceremony it was invariably used for
pouring wine into the phiale or _patera_, from which the libation was
made. It occurs on the Parthenon frieze. In conjunction with the
krater, or mixing-bowl, it is seen on a “Cyrenaic” kylix in the B.M. (B
3), in a scene representing a sacrifice. In reference to this may be
quoted a curious injunction given by Hesiod (_Op. et Di._ 744),

     µ?d? p?t’ ???????? t???µe? ???t???? ?pe??e? p????t??,

which seems to imply that it was considered an unlucky thing to put the
jug back in its place on the edge of the krater during a banquet.[621]
Thucydides[622] speaks of silver oinochoae in the temple at Eryx, in
conjunction with libation-bowls and incense-burners, and Athenaeus[623]
mentions similar offerings at Metapontum.

[Illustration: FIG. 45. PROCHOÖS.]

A variety of the oinochoë, which is not found before the middle of the
R.F. period, but becomes very popular in Apulia, has a very high curved
handle and tall stem, the body tapering straighter downwards (Fig. 45).
This is usually known as the p??????, and corresponds in form to our
claret-decanter. The p?????? served the same purpose as the ???????,
and is frequently mentioned in Homer. It was used not only for pouring
wine, but for water to wash the hands of guests.[624]

[Illustration: FIG. 46. OLPE.]

A third form, usually known as the ??p? (Fig. 46), is almost
cylindrical in shape, with plain or trefoil lip and no marked neck; it
is more usually found in the B.F. period. In early B.F. wares the
subjects on the olpae are usually painted on the _side_, adjoining the
handle on the right[625]; they are always in panels. The word is
mentioned by Sappho and Ion of Chios.[626]

[Illustration: FIG. 47. EPICHYSIS.]

Lastly, we have a curious form, only found in Apulia, and belonging to
the extreme decadence of vase-painting (Fig. 47), which has a flat
cylindrical body like a round toilet-box (see Pyxis, p. 198) with
moulded edges. This is surmounted by a long narrow neck and beak-like
semi-cylindrical mouth[627]; and the whole effect is awkward and
inartistic. The name ?p???s??, derived from the list given by
Pollux,[628] is generally given to this form.

For the ladle used for drawing wine out of the krater to fill the
oinochoë the ordinary name was ??a??? (Lat. _simpulum_). This word also
commonly denoted a measure of about one gill. Among the painted vases
it is represented by a rare but particularly graceful shape, the body
fashioned like a straight-sided bowl, with a high looped handle (Fig.
48). In the early B.F. examples a high stem is added. This shape is not
found in the later R.F. period or in Southern Italy. The long handle is
obviously for convenience in dipping.

[Illustration: FIG. 48. KYATHOS.]

A series of names, all of which are derivatives from the word ????,
“draw” (used only of drawing water), appear to represent ladles of
various forms and uses. Herodotos[629] mentions the word ???st??, and
the forms ???ste??, ???t??, ???s???, ???st???, are also found.[630] The
???ta??a appears to have been a bronze ladle, used in the baths for
collecting oil, and for filling lamps.[631] The ????t????, on the other
hand, was a wine-ladle, also known as an ?f?ß??; it appears to have
been used in voting in the law-courts.[632] Another word used by
Aristophanes is ??????s??[633]; two parallels to which are the
?t????s?? and ??µ???s?? of the same author[634] and other comic
writers, both words meaning “soup-ladle.” It is doubtful if any of
these words were in use for fictile utensils.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The next branch of the subject is concerned with the various forms of
=Drinking-cups= in use among the Greeks. In these the potters may
perhaps be said to have attained their highest excellence, not only in
regard to beauty and grace of form, but also, so far as concerns one
variety at any rate—the R.F. Athenian kylix—in regard to the
decoration. The _locus classicus_ on the subject is the eleventh book
of Athenaeus, to which frequent reference has already been made[635];
but there are of course frequent references to these cups in Homer and
other poets. Athenaeus devotes a discourse by one of his “Doctors at
Dinner” entirely to this subject, the different names being discussed
in alphabetical order. Many of them are, as will be seen, only
alternatives names or nicknames for well-known shapes, while others
included in his description are certainly not drinking-cups at all. It
must also be borne in mind that many of the names are purely generic,
like the Latin _poculum_, and are not intended to connote any special
form; this is particularly the case in the descriptions of Homer,
where, indeed, we should not look for scientific accuracy.

The ordinary word for a drinking-cup was p?t????? or ??p?µa, but
neither is known to Homer[636]; the terms he uses are d?pa?, ??e?s??,
and ??pe????, the first being further defined as ?aµf???pe????. The
word ??ss?ß???[637] may be once for all briefly dismissed; it was so
called from ??ss?? (ivy), probably as being ornamented with ivy-foliage
in relief, and was made of wood. It is seldom that Homer’s descriptions
give any details as to form, and where they do they are difficult to
interpret aright. Athenaeus devotes a lengthy section of his discourse
to the explanation of the famous cup (d?pa?) of Nestor,[638] which he
names ?est???? (cf. p. 172), but arrives at no definite conclusion. It
has already been pointed out that a hint at its form seems to be given
by the gold and silver cups found in Mycenaean tombs, at Mycenae, and
Enkomi in Cyprus, although it need not be assumed that these are the
products of the civilisation which Homer describes; he may, however, be
speaking of traditional forms. Another instance of the d?pa? in legend,
is in the story of Herakles crossing the ocean in the golden d?pa? of
the Sun.[639]

Among the names of drinking-cups given by Athenaeus, the following may
be taken as used in a purely general sense, without any idea of a
particular form.

?µ?st??.—A cup from which it is possible to drink at one draught (cf.
?e??ß?, p. 169).

?µf?t??.—A two-handled cup (see under Skyphos, p. 186).

??t??????.—A cup named after King Antigonos.

???????.—A cup of metal (not necessarily silver). Pollux also gives the
word ???s??.

??t??.—A Cypriote name for a cup (“without handles,” from a and ???).

?a??a???.—An Alexandrine variety, of glass or clay.

??ssa.—Also an Alexandrine form, widening out below.

G???a?.—A Megarian name (the form of the word is Doric).

?epast???.—An uncertain form, variously explained.

?epast???.—A bye-form of d?pa?, in use at Kleitor in Arcadia.

???a?t??.—Also known as ?µa??e?a? ???a?. See under Rhyton (p. 193).

?f?ß?? or ?µßas????ta?.—The significance of these names is not obvious,
but see p. 179 for the former.

?d?p?t??.—A Rhodian name (cf. Pollux, vi. 96). Said to have been made
by the Rhodians in competition with the Athenian T?????e??? (see below,
p. 189). They were of light make, and not, like the Thericleian cups,
for the exclusive use of the rich.

???????.—Apparently an Egyptian name.

?µ?t?µ??.—An Athenian cup, probably hemispherical (but see above, p.
174).

?s?µ???.—A Cypriote term.

?e??ß?.—See under Krater (p. 169).

???d?.—An Asiatic name. Menander describes it as holding ten kotylae,
or about five pints.

??at????? or ??a????.—Polemon mentions silver specimens in the temple
of Hera and treasury of the Byzantines at Olympia.

?????e???.—It is doubtful if this word denotes a cup, as it is
catalogued with the ??at??, ??d??, and ???e???.

?aß????a.—A Persian cup, named from “greedy” drinking (?aß??t?? ?? t?
p??e??).

???a??a.—A cup made of Laconian clay.

??sß???.

?????.—A cup or bowl placed on the top of the kottabos-stand, and used
in the game of kottabos to receive the drops of wine thrown from the
kylix (_q.v._)

????.

????st???a.—A name given to the wine-cup dedicated to Herakles by the
ephebi at the time of entry into that rank.

?????.—A wooden cup.

?a?a???a????.—Probably a variety of the Skyphos (_q.v._).

?e????.—See under Amphora (p. 163). A generally disputed form.

??ta????.—A wide flat cup (from pet????µ?, “spread”).

???st??.

????s?a?.—Named from the king of Bithynia.

?????t??.—Called a cup by Athenaeus, but more probably to be identified
with the p?????? (p. 178).

???? or ????ta.—Probably a variant of ??t??. It is described as taking
the form of a Gryphon or Pegasos, both of which occur in rhyta (p. 193).

Sa??a??a.—A Persian cup.

Se?e????.—A cup named after King Seleukos.

?aßa?ta?.—A wooden cup.

??a???af??.—Probably a kind of rhyton (p. 193).

???????.—See p. 186, under ??µß???.

?st?a???.

?a???d????.—Probably named from the Thracian Chalkidike.

??????.—A bronze cup (perhaps a kind of kylix).

?d??.—A cup associated with the singing of s????a.

???.—An egg-shaped cup.

??s??f???.—A double cup, apparently like an egg standing in an egg-cup.

Pollux also mentions the names ??s?a??? and ?appad??????; and Athenaeus
describes a ??aµµat???? ??p?µa, or cup ornamented with letters (in
relief), probably a late Hellenistic type.

We now come to the names which can be identified with existing vases,
or are described with some indication of their form.

A name which constantly occurs in two forms is the ??t??? or ??t????.
The distinction appears to be that the former had no handles, but the
latter one,[640] but otherwise the form was probably much the same,
being that of a deep cup; it is also probable that it was sometimes
used like the ??a???, as a ladle for drawing out wine, as well as for
drinking. The word ??t??? is found as early as Homer,[641] used
metaphorically for the hollow where the thigh-bone joins the hip; in
its proper meaning as a cup, it occurs in the familiar proverb[642]
which has been adopted into our language:

          p???? µeta?? p??e? ??t???? ?a? ?e??e?? ?????
          “There’s many a slip ’twixt the cup and the lip.”

As a measure it was equivalent to six kyathi, or roughly half a pint,
as already shown (p. 135). The ?µ???t????? there discussed is, however,
a one-handled cup, and therefore to be called a ??t???? rather than a
??t???. The latter is a word constantly found in Greek literature from
Homer downwards, as in the passage where Andromache describes the
impending fate of her orphan child, to whom a pitying patron will hold
out a cup, merely to taste, not to drain.[643]

From Athenaeus we learn that the ??t???? was like a deep
washing-basin (???t?????), and that it was associated with Dionysos.
Eratosthenes[644] calls it the most beautiful and the best for
drinking of all cups. The diminutive form ??t???s??? occurs in
connection with the ??????], discussed below (p. 195), which had many
of these little cups attached to it. It has been customary to apply
the name ??t??? to a class of vase found at all periods, with flat
base, slightly curved sides, and two flat handles level with the rim
(Fig. 49); it sometimes attains a considerable size for a
drinking-cup, and is usually decorated with one or two figures each
side. A notable exception is the beautiful vase in the British Museum
(Plate LI.), signed by Hieron, with its frieze of figures all round.
This identification is of course at variance with Athenaeus'
statement that the kotyle has no handle; but no other satisfactory
name has been found for the form.

[Illustration: FIG. 49. KOTYLE.]

Closely connected, it would seem, with the ??t??? is the cup known as
the s??f?? or s??pf??, to which there are frequent references in the
poets and elsewhere but not in Aristophanes. Homer[645] describes it as
a rustic sort of bowl, which held milk; Simonides applies to it the
epithet ??at?e?ta, or “handled.” Athenaeus connects the word with
s?af??, a round wooden vessel which held milk or whey, and this seems
to accord with the mention of it in Homer. It was always specially
associated with Herakles,[646] who was said to have used it on his
expeditions; hence certain varieties were known as s??f?? ??a??e?t????,
but it is more probable that this word refers to Heraklea Trachinia in
Northern Greece. Besides the Herakleotic, Athenaeus mentions specially
Boeotian, Rhodian, and Syracusan skyphi. The ordinary shape of the vase
may be inferred from the form of that which Herakles is often depicted
holding on the monuments[647]; it is of the same type as the ??t???,
but the body tapers below and has a higher foot, while the handles are
placed lower down and bent upwards. Among the late black-glazed wares
with opaque paintings (p. 488) some examples occur of cups with handles
twisted in a kind of knot, and it has been suggested that these
represent the “Heraklean knot” described by Athenaeus[648] as to be
seen on the handles of these: s??f?? ??a??e?t????.

The word is also frequently used by Roman authors, and there is a
particularly interesting passage in Suetonius (cf. p. 134) alluding to
the _Homerici scyphi_ adorned with chased designs from the Homeric
poems[649] which Nero possessed; these were, of course, metal bowls
with reliefs,[650] but they have their fictile counterparts in the
so-called Megarian bowls (p. 499).

Athenaeus[651] quotes from the philosopher Poseidonios a passage
referring to drinking-cups called ?a?a???a???, which may be supposed to
have some connection with the Panathenaic festival, and attempts have
been made to identify them with a class of skyphi or kotylae of the
R.F. period, the invariable subject on which is an owl between two
olive-branches (p. 410).[652] There is no doubt some reference to the
Athenian goddess, but it is more likely that they represent some kind
of official measure (see above, p. 135).

It will be noted that the s??f?? appears to have been originally a
wooden vessel used as a milking-pail, and it is further identified in
Theocritus with the wooden ??ss?ß???, to which we have already alluded.
Two other words are given by Athenaeus to denote large wooden bowls of
the type of the s??f??, namely the ?µf?t?? and the p???a[653] both used
as milking-pails. They were not strictly speaking drinking-cups. Among
existing Greek vases this form, viz. a deep straight-sided bowl, such
as a carved wooden vessel would naturally take, seems to be best
represented by the examples discovered on the site of the Cabeiric
temple at Thebes, which are of this shape and of considerable size (see
Fig. 98, p. 392).[654]

The ß??µ?a? is described by Athenaeus[655] as a cup resembling the
taller skyphi, and the ??ß?????[656] (whence the ecclesiastical Latin
_ciborium_[657]) was also a kind of skyphos. The name µast?? should
also be included here, from the likeness of the cup to the skyphos. Its
characteristic is that it has no foot but only a small knob, and
therefore exactly resembles a woman’s breast with the nipple, whence
its name. In Greek pottery the only known painted examples are of the
B.F. period,[658] and these are usually modelled and painted with great
care and delicacy. The so-called Megarian bowls (see p. 499) should
also be included under this heading, in reference to which it has been
pointed out that µast?? of metal were dedicated in temples at Oropos in
Boeotia and at Paphos.[659]

Another form of cup, of which Athenaeus has much to say, is the
??µß???[660] (other forms being ??µß? and ??ßßa), which was supposed to
represent the ??pe???? of Homer. He describes it as small and deep,
without foot or handles. On the other hand, the word also means “a
boat,” and we further find the words ??at?? and t?????? cited by
Athenaeus[661] as names of cups, the former being expressly called “a
boat-shaped cup.” This has the support of the author Didymos (quoted by
Athenaeus, 481 F) who says the ??µß??? was a long narrow cup like a
ship.[662] A possible instance of it is a long askos-shaped vessel in
the British Museum,[663] on which is incised [??????? ?? ???T?S],
“Drink, do not lay me down”; but it is not of a form adapted for
drinking. The question must therefore remain undecided. Ussing thinks
that ??µß??? was originally a cup-name, and that the other meaning is
derived from it; but, on the other hand, ??at?? and t?????? are merely
nicknames as applied to cups.

The ????? is a cup which cannot now be identified, but is often
referred to by ancient authors.[664] It seems to have been a Spartan
name for a soldier’s cup, used for drinking-water, and was adapted by
its recurved mouth for straining off mud.[665] It has been conjectured
to have been the name for the shape we have above described as a
??t???, but on no good grounds; Pollux (vii. 162) wrongly classifies it
with the p???? and amphora, but it was undoubtedly a cup, as indeed he
implies elsewhere (vi. 97). Usually of clay, it is sometimes described
as of bronze,[666] and Aristophanes applies to it the epithet
fae????,[667] which suggests a bright metallic surface. Hesychius and
Suidas describe it as having one handle. From the ????? was derived the
word ???????es?a?, “to drink hard.”[668]

The ????a??? was a cup so called because of a fancied resemblance to an
inverted beetle.[669] It was specially associated with Dionysos,[670]
and from this fact its form has been identified with certainty from the
two-handled drinking-cup which he is so often depicted holding,
especially on B.F. vases. It is a very beautiful though for some reason
never a very popular shape in pottery, and is found at all
periods.[671] In form it may be described as a deep straight-sided cup
on a high stem, with loop-shaped handles starting from the rim each
side and coming down to the lower edge of the body (Fig. 50). Probably
it was considered a difficult shape to produce in pottery, and was
commoner in metal examples.

At all events the ?a???s???, a similar kind of cup, seems to have been
consistently made of metal. Athenaeus[672] describes it with more than
usual detail as tall, moderately contracted in the middle, with handles
reaching to the bottom (_i.e._ of the bowl). The form is to be
recognised on the monuments (if not in actual examples[673]) as a
variation of the ????a??? in which the body has a sort of “waist,”
bulging out again below. Virgil mentions _carchesia_,[674] and silver
specimens were among the dedications in the Parthenon at Athens.[675]

[Illustration: FIG. 50. KANTHAROS.]

Of all the ancient forms of drinking-cup, the most celebrated and in
some respects also the most beautiful, was the =Kylix= ?????, Lat.
_calix_),[676] a two-handled cup of varying size, with large bowl on a
high stem. The shape of this vase shows a continuous development, as
does also its decorative treatment, from the most primitive times down
to the end of Greek vase-painting. It was moreover the form which the
great artists of the early part of the fifth century selected as the
medium of their finest efforts. The kylix played an important part at
the banquet, being not only one of the commonest forms of drinking-cup
in use, but as being also used in the game of kottabos (see Chapter
XV.). In the banqueting-scenes which are so popular a subject on the
R.F. kylikes of the best period, the guests are often represented
twirling vases of this shape on one finger crooked through the handle;
this being the manner in which they discharged the drops of wine at the
mark. Hence the kylix was also known as ?????? or ??ttaß??. When not in
use the kylix was hung on a peg on the wall, as it is sometimes
depicted on R.F. vases.[677]

Athenaeus[678] cites the Athenian and Argive kylikes as being of
special repute; the latter are described by Simonides as f????e????, a
word of doubtful meaning.[679] In the former’s own city of Naukratis a
special kind of kylix[680] was made by hand (not on the wheel), with
four handles and a very flat base, and this was dipped in a solution of
silver to give it a metallic appearance.[681] Lacedaemonian, Chian, and
Teian kylikes are also mentioned (the last-named by Alcaeus: see p.
64). But the most famous variety was the Thericleian, so named from
Therikles, a Corinthian potter contemporary with Aristophanes. These
cups were chiefly made at Athens; they are frequently mentioned by
Middle and New Comedy writers, and are described by Athenaeus[682] as
depressed round the sides, deep, with short handles. They were imitated
in wood or glass, and gilded, and Athenaeus mentions that the Rhodians
made ?d?p?t?de? (see above) in emulation of them.[683]

Besides the various diminutive forms of ?????, such as ??????? (see
above, p. 133), ????s??, etc.,[684] there is a long list of synonyms
for this form, about most of which, however, there is nothing to say
except that they are probably mere nicknames. Athenaeus gives the
following: ????????, ???a??a, ???ß?s???, pe?t?p????, s???????,
?a???st?µ??, ??????, and µa?a???; also µet???pt???, from its use after
the washing of the hands, _i.e._ at the end of the meal; ????s?a?,
named from a king of Bithynia; and f???t?s?a, corresponding to our
“loving-cup.”[685]

In the history of Greek vase-painting the kylix is a shape known and
popular at all periods, from the Mycenaean Age down to the end of the
fifth century; in the fabrics of Southern Italy it but seldom occurs.
The Mycenaean form is peculiarly graceful, with its tall stem and
swelling bowl; it is generally decorated with a cuttle-fish, a motive
well suited to its outlines (see Plate XV.).

During the archaic period of Greek vases a steady development can be
traced, both in form and methods of decoration, until the outburst of
the R.F. style. The early Corinthian specimens (cf. p. 313) are
somewhat cumbrous, with very low stem, shallow bowl with heavy
overhanging lip and small handles; in strong contrast thereto are the
Cyrenaic cups (p. 341 ff.), which are in execution quite in advance of
their time (first half of sixth century); their graceful, delicate
forms are evidently imitated from metal. These early cups are as a rule
covered with a cream-coloured or buff slip and decorated all over, and
the interior designs, which cover the whole or almost the whole of the
inside, are a marked feature of these types.

[Illustration: FIG. 51. KYLIX (EARLIER FORM).]

Turning to the Attic fabrics we find that in the beginning of the sixth
century the prevalent form (evolved from the Corinthian type) has a
high stem and deep bowl with off-set lip, the decoration being confined
to the upper band of the exterior, in the form of a frieze (Fig. 51).
This type is also illustrated by a small Rhodian group in the British
Museum,[686] which, however, has elaborate interior designs. In the
next stage, represented by the Minor Artists (see p. 379 ff.), the form
remains the same, but the manner of decoration is different, interior
designs again appearing; often the design is confined to a narrow band,
the rest of the exterior being coloured black. Lastly, towards the end
of the fifth century, an entirely new form is introduced, in which the
break in the outline disappears and the bowl becomes flatter, with a
gracefully-curved convex outline, while the stem is shortened (Fig.
52). This form is the one adopted throughout the R.F. period, with few
exceptions, and it is possible that it was actually invented by the
earliest R.F. artists, such as Nikosthenes and Pamphaios, though it is
also employed by Exekias.[687] The methods of decoration cannot however
be treated of here.

[Illustration: FIG. 52. KYLIX (LATER FORM).]

An extremely delicate form of kylix is used by the potter Sotades
(Chapter X.), with handles in imitation of a bird’s merrythought.
Towards the end of the fifth century the shape changes somewhat, the
stem disappearing and the bowl becoming deeper. In Southern Italy the
kylix-form is only represented by gigantic shallow bowls, with small
stout handles attached to the rim, probably intended for hanging
against the wall. The Naucratite kylikes mentioned above seem to have
been made somewhat after this pattern; it was at any rate typical of
Hellenistic taste.

[Illustration: FIG. 53. PHIALE.]

The word f????[688] (Lat. _patera_) bore in Greek a very different
meaning from that suggested by the modern word _phial_. It was in fact
a shallow bowl shaped like a saucer, and had no handle, but in place of
one a boss (?µfa???) in the centre, which was hollowed out underneath
in order to admit of the insertion of a thumb or finger (Fig. 53).
Hence it was generally styled µes?µfa??? or ?µfa??t??.[689] As a
vase-form it is not of frequent occurrence, and was probably more
frequently made in metal, especially in the Hellenistic period. Those
depicted on painted vases are usually indicated as having ribbed or
fluted exteriors, which can only denote metal (cf. Vol. II. Fig. 132).
About the third or second century B.C. imitations of metal phialae in
terracotta, with moulded interior designs, are of common occurrence.
Being signed by potters residing at Cales, they are usually known as
“Calene phialae.” There are two in the British Museum,[690] which are
an exact reproduction of silver specimens in the same collection.

Homer uses the word in two senses: (1) as equivalent to a ??ß??, as if
used for boiling water[691]; (2) as a cinerary urn.[692] Obviously in
both these cases the significance of this particular word must not be
pressed. Later, however, we find very frequent mention of the phiale in
classical authors, such as Herodotos, Pindar, and Plato, in all cases
with the same restricted significance, that of a vessel used in making
libations. On the R.F. vases it appears in countless examples, used in
this manner, especially by Nike. Aristotle, by way of illustrating the
inversion of a simile, says “You may call the shield the phiale of
Ares, or the phiale the shield of Dionysos,” no doubt with reference to
its buckler-like shape.[693] Athenaeus (xi. 462 D) quotes a passage
from Xenophanes which implies its use for holding perfumes at banquets.

Many words occur as synonyms of f????, such as the a?a???, ???t???,
????????e??, ??s??, f????, ß?t?a????, and ?ep?st?.[694] The last-named
word has been suggested above (p. 165) for a kind of large covered dish
or bowl, but we can only ascertain that it was a drinking-vessel of
some kind, resembling a large kylix.[695]

[Illustration: FIG. 54. Rhyton.]

The ??t??, or drinking-horn (from ???, “flow”), is a familiar shape in
the R.F. and later styles, but as a vase-form does not occur before the
middle of the fifth century.[696] Its peculiarities were: firstly, that
it could not be set down without drinking the contents; secondly, that
the narrow end was almost always modelled in the form of the head of
some animal, or of a woman or Satyr. Some examples are known in the
form of two heads back to back, usually a Satyr and a Maenad, but these
having a flat circular base are an exception to the first rule noted
above, and partake more of the nature of a cup than of a drinking-horn.
Although no archaic examples have been preserved, the rhyton, or
???a?,[697] as it is also called, frequently appears on B.F. vases,
being generally held by Satyrs or revellers, or by Dionysos.[698]
Athenaeus says it was a form reserved for the use of heroes, and that
???a? was the older name for it.[699] Among the South Italian vases, it
is found almost exclusively in Apulia, and these belong to the
decadence of the Apulian style, the paintings being limited to a figure
of Eros, or a woman, and little more. These rhyta have one handle, and
the cup-part is generally cylindrical in form, tapering slightly
towards the lower part, where the head is attached (Fig. 54.). In some
instances the form is narrower and more elongated, with fluted body.
The animals’ heads are usually left unvarnished, and coloured in detail
like the terracotta figures; the mouth often forms a spout from which
the liquid could be allowed to run out.[700] The heads, which occur in
great variety, include the panther, fox, wolf, horse, goat, mule, deer,
and dog[701]; also Gryphons and Pegasi (see below). Athenaeus mentions
a vase called the t?a???af??,[702] which was doubtless a rhyton ending
in two heads, a goat and a deer conjoined, like some known specimens;
he also quotes a description of another called e??fa?, explained as a
rhyton with two spouts (d????????).[703] Further, under the heading
????ta, which is doubtless a synonym for ??t??, he mentions one in the
form of a Gryphon, another in the form of a Pegasos.[704] The name is
mentioned by Demosthenes, together with ??µß?a and f???a?.[705] It is
worthy of mention that among the Mycenaean objects discovered at Enkomi
in Cyprus, in 1896, and now in the British Museum, there are two or
three rhyta in porcelain, corresponding in form to those of the R.F.
period, and of very advanced style[706]; they are in fact quite unique.

A few comparatively unimportant names of vessels for holding food and
liquids at the table may next be discussed.

[Illustration: FIG. 55. PINAX.]

The names given for dishes are d?s???, pa?????, and t??ß????, the
latter of which frequently occurs in Aristophanes, but pa????? seems to
be of late introduction, and more used by the Romans (see Chapter
XXI.).[707] For a plate the usual name was p??a? (also p??a????,
p??a??s???), a form which is interesting as often occurring among
painted vases (Fig. 55). It is found at all periods, from the fabrics
of Rhodes and Naukratis down to the Apulian and Campanian
“fish-plates,” which have a sinking in the centre, and are painted with
fish, shell-fish, etc. They were no doubt used for eating fish, the
sinking being for the sauce.[708] A famous early instance of the pinax
is the “Euphorbos-plate” in the British Museum (see p. 335). The name
is also given to the square plaques or tablets, such as those found at
Corinth, on the Athenian Acropolis, and elsewhere, which were generally
of a votive character. They are often depicted on the vases themselves,
indicating the locality of a shrine.[709]

Vessels for holding vinegar or sauces were known by the names of
???ßaf??, ????, or ?µß?f???.[710] The shapes are not exactly known, but
they were apparently small cups or dishes; the incorrect identification
of the first-named with the ??at?? we have already discussed (p. 171).
The words ??e?? and ???e??? are given by Pollux[711] as vases for
holding sweets, and the ??µ???d???? or ??µ??????? was, as the name
implies, a box or receptacle for spices.[712] The last-named has been
identified with the ??????, described by Athenaeus as “a round vessel,
having attached several little kotylae (??t???s????).”[713] Two
existing forms correspond in some degree to this description: one found
in Cyprus and at Corinth, and consisting of a hollow ring, to which
small cups or jars are attached at intervals; the other found chiefly
in Melos, and consisting of a central stand, round which are grouped a
varying number of alabastron-like vases, evidently designed for holding
small quantities of unguents or perfumes, or perhaps flowers, eggs, or
other objects. They are all of very early date, and decorated in
primitive fashion.[714] A better form of the word seems to be ???????.
Many have been found at Eleusis,[715] and it is supposed that they were
used in the Mysteries for carrying the first-fruits.[716]

[Illustration: FIG. 56. LEKYTHOS.]

Several kinds of vases were used for holding oil, the characteristic of
all these shapes being the narrow neck and small mouth, which were
better adapted for pouring the liquid drop by drop. The ordinary Greek
word for an oil-flask is ???????, frequently found in Aristophanes and
elsewhere. We have already referred (pp. 132, 143) to the passages in
the _Ecclesiazusae_ where the practice of placing lekythi on tombs, and
generally of using them for funeral purposes, finds allusion. From
these passages it has been possible to identify the class of
white-ground Athenian vases on which funeral subjects are painted, with
absolute certainty as =Lekythi=. But the shape is not confined to this
one class. In the early B.F. period (especially in Corinthian wares) it
assumes a less elegant form, with cup-shaped mouth, short thick neck,
and quasi-cylindrical body tapering slightly upwards (cf. the
alabastron below). The later form, which prevails from the middle of
the B.F. period down to the end of the fourth century at Athens, with
very little variation of form, is one of the most beautiful types of
Greek vases (Fig. 56). It has a long neck, to which the handle is
attached, flat or almost concave shoulder, and cylindrical body,
semi-oval at the base. The B.F. examples are seldom found in Italy, and
almost all come from Athens and other Hellenic sites, or from Sicily, a
country in which the form seems to have been exceptionally popular. The
same may be said of the ordinary R.F. examples, which have no
sepulchral reference, and are found in large numbers at Gela
(Terranuova) in Sicily, but seldom elsewhere. The white lekythi have
been found in Eretria, and at Gela, and Locri in Southern Italy,
besides Athens. The lekythos seldom attains to any great size, except
in the marble examples used as tombstones. They were probably used at
the bath and in the gymnasium, and may also have served other purposes,
_e.g._ for pigments. In illustration of this reference may be made to
the well-known passage in Aristophanes’ _Frogs_ (1200 ff.), where the
jeer of Aeschylos at Euripides’ stereotyped beginnings of his plays,
???????? ?p??ese?, seems to imply “he is hard up for something new to
say,” _i.e._ “he has lost his paint-pot; his lines need embellishment.”

[Illustration:

  FIG. 57. LEKYTHOS (LATER FORM).
]

Towards the end of the fifth century the lekythos takes a new departure
(Fig. 57), and appears with a squat, almost spherical body, without
foot (except for the base-ring). This form is sometimes known as
_aryballos_ (see below), but is perhaps more accurately described as a
“wide-bodied” (Germ. _bauchige_) lekythos. It is very popular at Athens
in the late fine or polychrome vases,[717] and was adopted exclusively
in Southern Italy, where it is the only form of lekythos found. This
type of vase is often found in the period of the Decadence with a
subject moulded in relief attached to the front, sometimes of a comic
nature.

[Illustration: FIG. 58. ALABASTRON.]

The _alabastron_ (???ßast??? or ???ßast??, both forms being found in
Classical Greek) is a shape closely allied to the lekythos. It
preserves the same form throughout the period of Greek vase-painting
(Fig. 58.), but is not often found after the middle of the sixth
century. In the early Corinthian wares it is very common. The name is
derived from the material of which it was originally made, and many
examples of alabaster vases of this shape have been found in
excavations. It was chiefly used for holding oil, unguents, and
cosmetics, and is often represented in scenes of ladies’ toilet as in
use for these purposes. Its characteristics are a flat round top with
small orifice, short neck, and more or less cylindrical body with
rounded-off base, intended for placing in a stand (??aßast?????).[718]
It is generally without handles, but when they occur they are in the
form of two small ears, through which a cord was passed for carrying or
suspending it. The “alabaster box” of the Gospels was a vessel of this
form (cf. the original Greek), and it was broken by knocking off the
top, in order that the contents might flow out quickly. The name ß?ssa
is also given as a synonym of the ???ßast???.[719]

[Illustration: FIG. 59. ARYBALLOS.]

Another vase of the same type is that known as the ???ßa????. The
derivation of the word is unknown, but the first half connects it with
the “ladle” class of vases (???t??, etc.), of which we have already
spoken. It can, however, hardly be a vase of that type, and the
connection seems to be its use in the bath,[720] _i.e._ as an
oil-flask. It is generally described as resembling a purse;
Athenaeus[721] says it is broader below than above, like a purse tied
at the neck with a string. The name, however, is usually applied to a
form of vase akin to the alabastron, but with small globular body,
handle, and very short neck (Fig. 59.). This type is almost confined to
the Corinthian and other early fabrics, and frequently occurs in glazed
or enamelled ware (see p. 127). Its connection with the bath is
undoubted, and it was generally carried on a string, together with a
strigil or flesh-scraper. As this form died out in the sixth century,
the name has been used, as noted above, for a later variety of the
lekythos, in which the body approaches a globular form.

Transitional between the alabastron and the aryballos is a type of
which some examples occur among early Corinthian wares, with egg-shaped
body, flat round top, and small ear-like handle, the base being rounded
off. To this the name ß?µß????? has been tentatively given, on the
authority of Antisthenes, who defines the word as meaning a kind of
lekythos with narrow neck.[722] In the same passage of Athenaeus[723]
it is contrasted with the quickly-emptied f???? or bowl; those who
drink from it must do so drop by drop (?at? µ????? st????te?). The name
may denote a cocoon, the shape of which this vase resembles, or may be
imitative, from the gurgling sound made by a liquid poured therefrom.
The ????e?pt??? was also probably a kind of oil-flask.[724]

[Illustration: FIG. 60. PYXIS.]

A few forms of vases were exclusively devoted to feminine use. These
include the p????, a cylindrical box with cover, in which jewellery or
other objects such as hair-pins, cosmetics, etc., might be kept for use
in the toilet (Fig. 60.). The painted examples of this form, which
nearly all belong to the later R.F. period, are usually decorated with
appropriate subjects, women at their toilet, preparations for weddings,
etc. The sµ?µat?????, or soap-box, served similar purposes.[725] It
seems to be represented by a form of vase of which the British Museum
possesses a specimen (without figure decoration), with cover and high
stem, but no handle except the knob on the cover. It is intermediate in
form between the pyxis and the so-called ?epast? (p. 165), and
sometimes appears in toilet and other scenes.[726] A rare form, found
almost exclusively in the R.F. period,[727] consisting of a globular
vase with vertical looped handles on a high stem, has been variously
named, but the latest theory is that it represents a ??ß??
?aµ????.[728] It contained lustral water, and is usually decorated with
bridal scenes. One is depicted in a toilet scene on a pyxis in the
British Museum.[729]

[Illustration: FIG. 61. EPINETRON OR ONOS.]

Lastly, a peculiar semi-cylindrical vessel, closed at one end and open
down the side (Fig. 61.), was for a long time a puzzle to
archaeologists, but its use was finally determined by its appearance in
a vase-painting.[730] It is there held by a seated woman, fitted over
her knee and thigh, and was used while spinning to pass the thread
over. The name of these objects is given by Pollux (vii. 32) as
?p???t??? or ???? (“the donkey”). Several of them are painted with
spinning scenes, and the vase-painting alluded to above is curiously
enough on a vase of this form.

There is a type of vase, of which two or three varieties occur, which,
from its general likeness to a wine-skin, is usually styled =Askos=. It
does not, however, appear that there is any direct authority for this,
at least in literary records; where the word does occur, it always
denotes a leather skin, such as is sometimes depicted on the vases,
carried by a Seilenos or Satyr. It is, however, a convenient
expression, and there is no other recorded term which can on any
grounds be associated with this type.

[Illustration: FIG. 62. ASKOS.]

The earliest examples, which date from the middle of the R.F. period,
have a flat round body with convex top, and a projecting spout (Fig.
62); the handle is sometimes arched over the back to meet the spout, or
else takes a separate ring-like form.[731] They are usually decorated
with two small figures, one on each side. In the vases of Southern
Italy a new form appears (Fig. 63), chiefly found in Apulia, in which
the resemblance to a wine-skin is much more apparent, the tied-up pairs
of legs being represented by the spout or a projection. The handle is
usually arched over the back, and the pouch-shaped body sometimes
assumes an almost birdlike form.

[Illustration: FIG. 63. APULIAN ASKOS.]

A variety which is also common in Southern Italy is made of plain black
ware, and is not painted but has a subject in relief in a medallion on
the top[732]; the handle is ring-shaped[733] and the form generally
resembles the variety first described, except that the body is flat on
the top, and convex below, with a base-ring (Fig. 64). It seems
probable that these vases were used for holding oil for feeding lamps,
and consequently they are generally known by the Latin name of
_guttus_, or “lamp-feeder” (see pp. 211, 503). Whether the painted aski
were used for the same purpose is doubtful; those, however, with the
large body seem to have been intended for other purposes, especially as
they often have a strainer inserted in them. Some indeed appear to have
been used as rattles, and still contain small balls or pebbles, placed
within them for that purpose. On the whole, however, it seems more
convenient to reckon the ?s??? with the oil-vases.[734]

[Illustration: FIG. 64. SO-CALLED “GUTTUS.”]

Among vases which do not exactly fall under the heading of any
particular shape may be noted certain types of moulded vases, and those
with reliefs modelled on them or attached. Many of these almost fall
under the category of terracotta figures, but still must be reckoned as
vases, even when painted in the methods of terracottas rather than
pottery. Such are the large aski described on page 119, and the
contemporary ornamental vases modelled in the form of female heads, of
Maenads, or of Athena (as B.M. G 1). Other types we have described
elsewhere,[735] such as the rhyta ending in animals’ heads, the
kanthari and rhyta of the R.F. period in the form of human or Dionysiac
heads, and the analogous vases of the archaic period. Again, there are
such forms as the flasks with flat circular bodies, and the large
pyxides which are often found in Southern Italy.[736] They usually bear
a subject in relief, covered with a white slip and painted in pink and
blue, like the Canosa vases; a specimen from Pompeii, with rich remains
of colouring, has lately been acquired by the British Museum. The
curious type of vase sometimes found in Sicily, with a tall conical
cover, the ornamentation being partly in encaustic, partly in gilded
relief, has been already mentioned.[737] There is also a late variety
of the so-called kernos (p. 195), consisting of four cups united on an
elaborate fluted stand, of which the British Museum possesses two good
examples.[738]

It should be borne in mind that all these exceptional shapes are
probably imitations of metal-work, perhaps made for the benefit of
those who could not afford the more expensive material, just as
imitation jewellery was sometimes made in gilt terracotta. Throughout
the Hellenistic period (to which the classes we are discussing chiefly
belong), the universal tendency is to substitute metal vases for
pottery, and moulded or relief-wares for painted decoration, and the
potter, finding the painted vases were no longer appreciated, was
forced to confine himself to imitating metal, and thus keep abreast
with the new fashion. The whole subject of the plastic decoration of
vases has been more fully dealt with elsewhere (Chapter XI.).

-----

Footnote 447:

  L. 64.

Footnote 448:

  “And in earthenware baked in the fire, within the closure of figured
  urns, there came among the goodly folk of Hera the prize of the
  olive-fruit” (Myers).

Footnote 449:

  “And he won five garlands in succession at the Panathenaic games,
  amphorae full of oil” (Frag. 155, _ed._ Bergk = _Anth. P._ xiii. 19).
  See also Schol. _in_ Ar. _Nub._ 1005, and _Inscr. Gr._ (_Atticae_),
  ii. 965_b_.

Footnote 450:

  Cf. Schol. _in_ Plat. _Hipp. Min._ 368 C: ??????? d? ???e??? t? fas??
  ?? ?tt???? ??? ? t??? ?e????? ?fe??? t? µ????.

Footnote 451:

  “And raise the great goblets, or if, Oikis, thou desirest aught else
  ... pour in and mix one and two full up to the brim, and let the one
  goblet oust the other.”

Footnote 452:

  _Graec. Ling. Dialect_, i. p. 247.

Footnote 453:

  viii. 381: see also p. 50.

Footnote 454:

  See p. 499.

Footnote 455:

  Suet. _Ner._ 47: see Robert, _Homer. Becher_, and _Class. Review_,
  1894, p. 325. The British Museum possesses a silver phiale, with
  terracotta replicas (G 117, 118), one of which is shown on Plate
  XLVIII. See also p. 500.

Footnote 456:

  Cf. the use of the word d?µ?s??? on bronze and lead weights.

Footnote 457:

  Egger in _Revue Archéol._ xvi. (1867), p. 292.

Footnote 458:

  See Hultsch, _Metrologie_, p. 99 ff.

Footnote 459:

  Arist. _Categ._ 12; also Polybius, iv. 56, ?t??µasa? ????? ?e??µ?a
  µ???a.

Footnote 460:

  B.M. F 175.

Footnote 461:

  Other instances are: Millingen-Reinach, 2; Munich 423; Reinach, i.
  291–92.

Footnote 462:

  Cf. B.M. E 534–37, 548–53; also Stackelberg, _Gräber der Hellenen_,
  pl. 17. Fig. 15 is from the vase F 101 in the British Museum.

Footnote 463:

  Cf. B.M. F 457–66.

Footnote 464:

  _Suppl._ 463.

Footnote 465:

  _E.g._ B.M. E 494. See also Chapter XV.

Footnote 466:

  See Schol. _in_ Ar. _Ran._ 218, and _J.H.S._ xx. p. 110 ff.

Footnote 467:

  For explanation and parallels see Frazer, _Golden Bough_, ii. p. 119
  ff.

Footnote 468:

  Raoul-Rochette in _Revue Archéol._ viii. (1851), p. 112: see also
  Theocr. xv. 113 ff.

Footnote 469:

  _Revue Archéol. l.c._ p. 118; Mart. xi. 19; Pliny, _H.N._ xix. 59.

Footnote 470:

  _Hist. Plant._ vi. 7.

Footnote 471:

  Pernice in _Jahrbuch_, 1899, p. 60 ff. He would also regard the
  so-called sµ?µat????? (see p. 198) as a vase of this class; but this
  seems much more doubtful. See also p. 167, under p??µ????.

Footnote 472:

  Cf. Böhlau, _Ion. u. Ital. Nekrop._ p. 39; Berlin 1108.

Footnote 473:

  Pernice’s arguments have been directly impugned by Kouroniotes in ?f.
  ???. 1899, p. 233, and by Robinson in _Boston Mus. Report_, p. 73;
  and it certainly seems more probable that metal vessels would have
  been used for this purpose; moreover, the form of the ??µ?at????? is
  well known. But he has personally assured the present writer that the
  clay ?????e? show traces internally of the use of fire.

Footnote 474:

  Reinach, i. 235 = Naples 3255.

Footnote 475:

  See p. 214.

Footnote 476:

  _Adv. Leoch._ 1086, 1089.

Footnote 477:

  Cf. _B.M. Cat. of Sculpture_, i. p. 297.

Footnote 478:

  See note on p. 132 above. The custom seems to have been specially in
  favour in the fourth century B.C.

Footnote 479:

  _E.g._ B.M. D 65, 70–1; _J.H.S._ xix. pl. 2. On the subject
  generally, see _ibid._ p. 169 ff.

Footnote 480:

  Fig. 20 = F 93, a Lucanian hydria in the British Museum, is a very
  fine instance, several of the vases being represented with painted
  subjects. Among them is a Panathenaic amphora (see above, p. 132), on
  which is depicted a chariot-race.

Footnote 481:

  _Il._ xxiii. 253.

Footnote 482:

  Q. Smyrn. iii. 737.

Footnote 483:

  It no doubt suggested Tennyson’s “Two handfuls of white dust, shut in
  an urn of brass.” Cf. l. 1142 (??te?).

Footnote 484:

  _Brit. School Annual_, 1901–2, pls. 18–19, p. 298; _Mon. Antichi_, i.
  p. 201, pls. 1–2.

Footnote 485:

  B 130: see also p. 46.

Footnote 486:

  No. 2422 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 34.

Footnote 487:

  E 811: see for other instances, Jahn, _Vasensamml. zu München_, p.
  lxxxv, note 600, and p. 39 above.

Footnote 488:

  _Cat. of Terracottas_, C 12.

Footnote 489:

  Mr. J. L. Myres, on opening a tomb at Amathus, in Cyprus, in 1894,
  found jugs, bowls, and other kinds of vases ranged round the body,
  like a dinner-service set out on a table.

Footnote 490:

  A good instance is the Python krater in the British Museum (F 149),
  one of the handles of which has been repaired with lead. See also
  Jahn, _Vasens. zu München_, p. ci, note 731; B.M. B 607, B 608, E
  106; Berlin 1768.

Footnote 491:

  Gerhard, _Auserl. Vasenb._ ii. 145 = Reinach, ii. 75.

Footnote 492:

  _Rev. Arch._ iii. (1904), p. 50.

Footnote 493:

  Juvenal, xiv. 308.

Footnote 494:

  _Vespae_, 1437.

Footnote 495:

  The use of this form of vase is further illustrated by the
  _hydrophoria_-scenes on B.F. vases, in which it constantly occurs.
  See below, p. 166.

Footnote 496:

  B.M. A 1054, B 450; Boeckh, _C.I.G._ i. 545.

Footnote 497:

  See Chapter XVII., where examples are given.

Footnote 498:

  Cf. also Bk. v. 198 ff.

Footnote 499:

  x. 62 ff.

Footnote 500:

  _Recherches sur les véritables Noms des Vases Grecs_, Paris, 1829.

Footnote 501:

  _Observations sur les Noms des Vases Grecs_, etc., Paris, 1833, and
  _Supplément_, 1837–38.

Footnote 502:

  _Rapporto Volcente_ in _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1831, p. 221 ff.; and in
  criticism of Letronne, _Berlins ant. Bildwerke_, i. p. 342 ff., and
  _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1836, p. 147 ff.

Footnote 503:

  _Handbuch d. Archäol._ § 298–301.

Footnote 504:

  _Ueber die hellenischen bemalten Vasen_, Munich, 1844.

Footnote 505:

  _De Nominibus Vasorum Graecorum_, Kopenhagen, 1844. This work is very
  useful for its exhaustive references to classical literature. It is
  also critically up to the mark.

Footnote 506:

  _Angeiologie_, Halle, 1854.

Footnote 507:

  _Vasensamml. zu München_, p. lxxxvi ff. (1854).

Footnote 508:

  There are some very useful articles in Daremberg and Saglio’s
  _Dictionnaire_ under the respective headings, so far as the work has
  appeared (down to M in 1904).

Footnote 509:

  Cf. also xi. 462 D.

Footnote 510:

  Pliny (_H.N._ iii. 82) states that the island of Pithecusa (the
  modern Ischia) was so called not from p??????, an ape, but from p????
  (_a figulinis doliorum_), implying that wine-casks were made here in
  antiquity, as they are at the present day.

Footnote 511:

  Athen. xi. 465 A, and cf. 495 B; _Il._ xxiv. 527; see Ussing, p. 33,
  and Suidas, _s.v._ The comic poets also speak of a p??????, or small
  p????, used for holding wine at festivals.

Footnote 512:

  See Chapter XX., and a relief in the Villa Albani, Helbig,
  _Führer_^2, ii. p. 56, No. 853; cf. also Hesychius, ?? p???, and Ar.
  _Eq._ 792.

Footnote 513:

  See Chapter XIV. (Fig. 126).

Footnote 514:

  B.M. B 464, F 210.

Footnote 515:

  _Op. et Di._ 98; the word has been confused with p????, meaning a
  box. See _J.H.S._ xx. p. 99.

Footnote 516:

  Hesych. _s.v._; Pollux, vii. 163.

Footnote 517:

  This must be distinguished from ???aß?? (see p. 111), a skeleton
  frame on which statues were modelled. See _Geoponica_, vi. 3, p. 4;
  Pollux, vii. 164; Jahn in _Ber. d. sächs. Gesellsch._ 1854, p. 42;
  Blümner, _Technologie_, ii. p. 42.

Footnote 518:

  _Brit. School Annual_, 1899–1900, p. 22; cf. _Amer. Journ. of Arch._
  1901, p. 404.

Footnote 519:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1903, pp. 96 ff., 140 ff., Beilagen 1–5.

Footnote 520:

  _Troja und Ilion_, i. p. 315.

Footnote 521:

  See Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 381 ff.; _Ath. Mitth._ 1886, pl. 4;
  _Röm. Mitth._ xii. (1897), p. 256; _Arch. Zeit._ 1881, p. 44 ff.;
  Kekulé, _Terracotten von Sicilien_, pls. 55–7, 60; and p. 496.

Footnote 522:

  Hom. _Il._ xxiii. 170; _Od._ ii. 290, ix. 164; _Inscr. Gr._
  (_Atticae_), ii. 965 _b_ (oil); and see Chap. XXI., _s.v._ See also
  Jahn, _Vasens. zu München_, p. xcii, and cf. the amphora in Rome with
  the oil-selling scene (Helbig, 70 = Reinach, i. p. 106).

Footnote 523:

  ?µf?f??e??, from ?µf?, “on either side,” and f???, “I carry.”
  Athenaeus (xi. 501 A) explains it as ? ??at????e? ?at? t? ?ta
  d???µe??? f??es?a?.

Footnote 524:

  _Trans. Roy. Soc. Lit._ 2nd Ser. iii. (1850), p. 7.

Footnote 525:

  Dumont, _Inscrs. Céramiques_, pl. 9.

Footnote 526:

  The order here given is that suggested by H. von Gaertringen in
  _Inscr. Gr._ xii. pt. 1, p. 8.

Footnote 527:

  Dumont, _Inscrs. Céramiques_, pl. 6; see also _Revue Archéol._ N.S.
  iii. (1861), pls. 9, 10, p. 283.

Footnote 528:

  _Jahrbücher für Philol._ Suppl. xvii. (1890), p. 281.

Footnote 529:

  Boeckh, _C.I.G._ ii. 2121.

Footnote 530:

  _Trans. Roy. Soc. Lit._ iii. (1850), p. 84.

Footnote 531:

  _C.I.L._ iv. 2584; other examples from Pompeii are given in Chapter
  XXI.

Footnote 532:

  Stoddart in _Trans. Roy. Soc. Lit._ 2nd Ser. iii. (1850), p. 1 ff.,
  iv. (1853), p. 1 ff.; Boeckh, _C.I.G._ iii. Nos. 5375–5392,
  5555–5566, 5751 (Sicily); _Philologus_, 1851, p. 278 ff. (Sicily);
  _Jahrb. für Philol._ Suppl.-Bd. xviii. p. 520 ff.; _Abh. d.
  phil.-phil. Kl. d. k. bayer. Akad. d. Wiss._ ii. (1837), p. 781 ff.;
  _Mélanges Gréco-Romaines_, i. p. 416 ff. (Olbia); Dumont, _Inscrs.
  Céramiques de Grèce_, Paris, 1872; _Ath. Mitth._ 1896, p. 127 ff.;
  _Jahrb. für Philol._ Suppl.-Bd. iv. p. 453, v. p. 447, x. pp. 1, 207
  (Olbia); _Inscr. Gr._ (_Ins. Maris Aegaei_), xii. pp. 175–203, Nos.
  1065–1441 (amphora-handles from Rhodes); and other references already
  given.

Footnote 533:

  _E.g._ Athens 657.

Footnote 534:

  _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1898, pls. 4, 6; Plate XLVII.

Footnote 535:

  _E.g._ Baumeister, iii. p. 1975, fig. 2114; Athens 688, 690.

Footnote 536:

  _Berlins ant. Bildw._ p. 346; see also Thiersch, _Tyrrhen. Amphoren_,
  p. 1 ff.

Footnote 537:

  See below, p. 388, and Karo in _J.H.S._ xix. p. 147 ff.

Footnote 538:

  See note 536 above; also p. 324.

Footnote 539:

  A “transitional” example has recently been published by Hartwig in
  _Röm. Mitth._ 1901, pl. 5, p. 117.

Footnote 540:

  See also Plate XXXV.

Footnote 541:

  Cf. B 603–609 with F 331, 332 in the Fourth Vase Room of the Brit.
  Mus. But it appears in Southern Italy at an earlier period than the
  fourth century; see Patroni, _Ceram. Antica_, p. 138, and below, p.
  485.

Footnote 542:

  See for examples F 339, 340 in Brit. Mus., and Patroni, _Ceramica
  Antica_, p. 142.

Footnote 543:

  See Patroni, _Ceramica Antica_, p. 79.

Footnote 544:

  Instances in B.M., E 350, and Brussels Museum (Noel des Vergers,
  _Étrurie_, pls. 32–36); also a plain wine-amphora of this form,
  dredged up from the sea, in the Terracotta Room, British Museum, Case
  51.

Footnote 545:

  See Pollux, x. 78; Athen. xi. 495 A. The former gives pe???a as an
  Aeolic synonym of ?e????.

Footnote 546:

  B.F. “pelikae” in B.M., B 190–192.

Footnote 547:

  x. 72. Cf. also Plat. Com. _apud_ Athen. xi. 783 D.

Footnote 548:

  _Lys._ 196. See also Demosth. _Lacr._ 933, where eighty stamni of
  sour wine are mentioned.

Footnote 549:

  ????d???? ???e???, _ad Il._ xviii. 1163, 23. Cf. also Herodotos, i.
  194; Xen. _Anab._ i. 9, 25.

Footnote 550:

  Lucian, _Meretr. dial._ 14; Athen, iii. 116 F.

Footnote 551:

  xi. 784 D.

Footnote 552:

  Pollux, vi. 14.

Footnote 553:

  _Vesp._ 676, and Schol. _ad loc._

Footnote 554:

  See below for an account of this word (p. 176).

Footnote 555:

  xi. 499 B, _q.v._ for several quotations illustrative of this word;
  also _Anth. P._ vi. 248 (ste??a????).

Footnote 556:

  _Quaest. Conviv._ i. 1, 5, p. 614 E (?a?????): cf. Phaedr. i. 26, 8.

Footnote 557:

  Hesych. _s.v._ ß?t???.

Footnote 558:

  See for a fine instance, _Brit. Mus. Cat. of Bronzes_, 650.

Footnote 559:

  Cf. Hdt. iii. 20; Athen. xi. 483 D; Hor. _Od._ iv. 11, 2; 12, 17.

Footnote 560:

  _Av._ 1032; _Eccl._ 1002.

Footnote 561:

  Ussing, p. 45. Cf. Pind. _Ol._ vi. 68; also Schol. _in Nem._ x. 64.

Footnote 562:

  xi. 496 A. See _Boston Mus. Report_, 1899, p. 73.

Footnote 563:

  Cf. 327 with 539. See for other mentions of the word, Ussing, p. 44.

Footnote 564:

  _Trapezitae_, 33; cf. Lucian, _Hermot._ 40, 57 (???p??), and Chap.
  XXI.

Footnote 565:

  Soph. _O.C._ 473, ?aß?? ?µf?st?µ???. He is here speaking of a ??at??,
  but in l. 478 he calls the same vase a ???ss??.

Footnote 566:

  Cf. also Aesch. _Fr._ 91, and Eur. _Cycl._ 89; _Ion_, 1173; Theocr.
  xiii. 46.

Footnote 567:

  Mosch. iv. 34; _Anth. P._ vii. 710.

Footnote 568:

  _Alex._ 20.

Footnote 569:

  Hesych. _s.v._; Pollux, viii. 66.

Footnote 570:

  xi. 495 A.

Footnote 571:

  Cf. Hdt. i. 25 and the Sigean inscription (Roberts, _Gk. Epigraphy_,
  i. p. 78).

Footnote 572:

  Examples of such painted stands in the B.M. are A 383–85, 464
  (Geometrical); A 1349; B 167 (does not belong to the amphora below
  which it is placed). A 741 is unpainted; F 279 is placed on an
  ornamental open stand of bronze.

Footnote 573:

  See Hdt. iv. 61, 152; Athen. xi. 472 A and v. 198 D, 199 B, 199 E.

Footnote 574:

  See p. 246 and Plate XII.

Footnote 575:

  The Aristonoös krater (see p. 297) is almost of the Mycenaean form,
  and represents the transition to the Corinthian. Cf. also _Notizie
  degli Scavi_, 1895, p. 185, for one found at Syracuse.

Footnote 576:

  For specimens found at Corinth, see _Amer. Journ. of Arch._ 1898, p.
  196; the form is also depicted on the Corinthian pinakes (_Ant.
  Denkm._ i. pl. 8, Nos. 12, 18).

Footnote 577:

  xi. 475 D. But Couve, in his valuable article in Daremberg and
  Saglio’s _Dictionnaire_ (_s.v._ Kelebe), is equally confident that
  the passage implies a kind of krater.

Footnote 578:

  The Antaios krater in the Louvre, G 103.

Footnote 579:

  See _Berlins Ant. Bildw._ p. 358, No. 18.

Footnote 580:

  Cf. _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, iv. p. 6.

Footnote 581:

  Cf. F 37, 269–73 in B.M.

Footnote 582:

  See Chap. XVIII; Patroni, _Ceramica Antica_, p. 25; _Röm. Mitth._
  1897, p. 201 ff.

Footnote 583:

  _E.g._ Fig. 108, p. 482.

Footnote 584:

  Cf. Plat. _Symp._ 214 A, where it is described as holding more than
  eight kotylae.

Footnote 585:

  _J.H.S._ xix. pl. 6, p. 141; cf. _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1889, p. 91;
  Daremberg and Saglio, i. p. 821, fig. 1026.

Footnote 586:

  A vase of the same type, but probably used as a “puzzle-jug,” is
  published in the _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ xix. pls. 19, 20.

Footnote 587:

  E 767, 768, the latter signed by Duris; see also _J.H.S._ _l.c._
  Another good example is the Euphronios psykter in Petersburg (p. 431).

Footnote 588:

  Cf. Athen. xi. 503 C and 467 D. In § 467 F he identifies the de????
  with the p?da??pt??; this use would be parallel to the Homeric use of
  the ??ß?? for washing (see below).

Footnote 589:

  Cf. Schol. _in Ar. Nub._ 280, 1472 ff.

Footnote 590:

  Cf. the use of the word ??ß?? for a cinerary urn by Aeschylus and
  Sophokles (_Ag._ 444; _Cho._ 686; _El._ 1401).

Footnote 591:

  xi. 470 D. An example in the B.M. is F 306.

Footnote 592:

  _E.g._ _Il._ xxi. 362; _Od._ xix. 386.

Footnote 593:

  iv. 61.

Footnote 594:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 221, B 328.

Footnote 595:

  Paus. v. 10, 4.

Footnote 596:

  Thuc. iv. 100.

Footnote 597:

  Hence the word ??t??sµ??. Cf. the episode in Ar. _Thesm._ 505 ff.

Footnote 598:

  ix. 113–14.

Footnote 599:

  Cf. Ar. _Ach._ 1076.

Footnote 600:

  _Op. et Di._ 748.

Footnote 601:

  _Ran._ 505.

Footnote 602:

  vi. 89 and x. 66.

Footnote 603:

  x. 66.

Footnote 604:

  Eur. _Fr._ 373; Pherekr. ?????d. 4 (_apud_ Athen. xi. 480 B).

Footnote 605:

  _B.M. Vases_, iv. G 194.

Footnote 606:

  Roberts, _Gk. Epigraphy_, i. p. 78.

Footnote 607:

  v. 195 C, 199 E: see also Pollux, vi. 100; Plut. _Alex._ 20.

Footnote 608:

  Ussing, p. 116; Poll. x. 77.

Footnote 609:

  _Brit. Mus. Cat. of Sculpture_, i. p. 166, No. 325_{11}.

Footnote 610:

  Hdt. i. 200.

Footnote 611:

  Athen. xi. 494 A (p?t?????). See also Liddell and Scott, _s.v._

Footnote 612:

  See Liddell and Scott, _s.v._

Footnote 613:

  Cf. B.M. Nos. 587, 588, etc.; also _Olympia_, iv. pl. 34.

Footnote 614:

  _Cat._ 1727.

Footnote 615:

  See Chapter XIV.

Footnote 616:

  Cf. Hom. _Od._ iii. 468, iv. 128, x. 361; _Il._ x. 576; also _J.H.S._
  Suppl. iv. p. 139.

Footnote 617:

  _E.g._ F 332 in B.M. (Plate XLV.). An early specimen is given by
  Wolters in _Jahrbuch_, 1898, p. 26; 1899, p. 126.

Footnote 618:

  See Pollux, x. 76–78; Ar. _Av._ 840, 1143, _Vesp._ 600; Schol. _in
  Pac._ 1244; Boeckh, _C.I.G._ ii. 3071; and generally, Ussing, p. 118.
  The name has been conventionally given to a kind of jar; see above,
  p. 164.

Footnote 619:

  Budge, _Life and Exploits of Alexander_, p. 4 ff.

Footnote 620:

  See p. 137, and B.M. E 533 ff., 548 ff.

Footnote 621:

  Cf. the modern superstition against crossing a knife and fork on a
  plate.

Footnote 622:

  vi. 46.

Footnote 623:

  xi. 479 F; cf. Boeckh, _C.I.G._ i. 150, line 30 = B.M. _Inscrs._ 29.

Footnote 624:

  _Od._ i. 136; xviii. 398.

Footnote 625:

  _E.g._ B.M. A 1532, B 33, B 52.

Footnote 626:

  Athen. x. 425 D (in form ??p??); xi. 495 B.

Footnote 627:

  German _Schnabelkanne_. This type of mouth is often seen in the
  primitive pottery of Cyprus.

Footnote 628:

  vi. 103; x. 92.

Footnote 629:

  ii. 168.

Footnote 630:

  Athen. x. 424 B; xi. 783 F.

Footnote 631:

  Ar. _Eq._ 1091; Pollux, x. 63; Theophr. _Char._ 9.

Footnote 632:

  Hesych. _s.v._; Pollux, vi. 19; Athen. x. 424 C; Boeckh, _C.I.G._ ii.
  2139; Schol. _in_ Ar. _Vesp._ 855.

Footnote 633:

  _Ach._ 245 and Schol.

Footnote 634:

  _Ach._ 1067 and Schol.; Athen. iv. 169 B; Boeckh, _C.I.G._ i. 161, 3.

Footnote 635:

  See also Pollux, x. 66.

Footnote 636:

  It should be noted that the cups he describes are always of metal.

Footnote 637:

  _Od._ ix. 346, xiv. 78; cf. the description in Theocr. i. 26 ff., and
  see below, p. 185; also Ussing, p. 126.

Footnote 638:

  xi. 488 ff.; cf. _Il._ xi. 632. It is described by Homer as “studded
  with golden nails; and four handles there were; and about each rested
  two golden doves; and beneath there were two bottoms.”

Footnote 639:

  See Chapter XIII.; and below, p. 186.

Footnote 640:

  Poll. vi. 96; Athen. xi. 478 B, F.

Footnote 641:

  _Il._ v. 306.

Footnote 642:

  Athen. xi. 478 E.

Footnote 643:

  _Il._ xxii. 494. See for other instances of its use, _Od._ xv. 312,
  xvii. 12 (p????? ?a? ??t????, “bite and sup”); Schol. _ad_ Ar.
  _Plut._ 1054; and Athen. xi. 478–79.

Footnote 644:

  _Apud_ Athen. 482 B.

Footnote 645:

  _Od._ xiv. 112. See Athenaeus, xi. 498 for quotations; also Eur.
  _Cycl._ 256, 390, 556, and Liddell and Scott, _s.v._

Footnote 646:

  Athen. xi. 500 A; Macrob. v. 21, 16.

Footnote 647:

  _E.g._ _B.M. Cat. of Bronzes_, 1244, 1272, 1309–14; Stephani,
  _Ausruhende Herakles_, pp. 151 ff., 195 ff.

Footnote 648:

  ?????e??? desµ?? (500 A).

Footnote 649:

  The sculptor Mys made a s??f?? ??a??e?t???? with the sack of Troy
  chased upon it (Athen. xi. 782 B).

Footnote 650:

  In _C.I.G._ ii. 2852 silver s??f?? chased with figures of animals are
  recorded among the offerings in the temple of Apollo at Branchidae.

Footnote 651:

  xi. 495 A.

Footnote 652:

  _E.g._ B.M. E 152, and see _Cat._ iii. p. 14. The owl and
  olive-branch seem to have been official marks; they appear on coins
  and dicasts’ tickets.

Footnote 653:

  xi. 783 D; 495 C; cf. Theocr. i. 25.

Footnote 654:

  Cf. B.M. B 77, 78; _J.H.S._ xiii. p. 78.

Footnote 655:

  xi. 784 D.

Footnote 656:

  See _id._ xi. 477 E.

Footnote 657:

  The word also occurs in Horace (_Od._ ii. 7, 22) for a large wine-cup.

Footnote 658:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 370, 371, 681.

Footnote 659:

  Robert, _Homerische Becker_, p. 3.

Footnote 660:

  xi. 481 D.

Footnote 661:

  xi. 782 F, 500 F.

Footnote 662:

  Cf. Macrob. v. 21: _pocula procera ac navibus similia_. In
  illustration of the resemblance of a bowl to a ship we may cite the
  story of the wise men of Gotham, also the golden bowl of the Sun (p.
  181), and the form of the Welsh coracle.

Footnote 663:

  F 596.

Footnote 664:

  Athen. xi. 483 B.

Footnote 665:

  Cf. Ar. _Eq._ 600, and see the account of this cup given by Plutarch,
  _Lycurg._ 9. The word for the inner rim or lip is ?µß?? (Pollux, vi.
  97; Critias _apud_ Athen. xi. 483 B; see _ibid._ viii. p. 347 B). The
  shape formerly regarded as a ????? on account of its recurved lip has
  been thought by Pernice to have been used for incense (_Jahrbuch_,
  1899, p. 60); but see above, p. 140.

Footnote 666:

  Boeckh, _C.I.G._ i. 161.

Footnote 667:

  _Pac._ 1094.

Footnote 668:

  Athen. xi. 483 F.

Footnote 669:

  _Ibid._ 473 D.

Footnote 670:

  Macrob. v. 21.

Footnote 671:

  See _J.H.S._ xviii. p. 288. For typical examples see Athens 612 and
  _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1897, p. 450 (Boeotian); also Berlin 1737,
  2116–20, 2876, 2877, 4019; _Anzeiger_, 1891, p. 116.

Footnote 672:

  xi. 474 E; cf. v. 198 B, C.

Footnote 673:

  _E.g._ Visconti, _Mus. Pio-Clem._ iv. pl. 35; _B.M. Cat. of
  Terracottas_, B 490.

Footnote 674:

  _Georg._ iv. 380.

Footnote 675:

  Boeckh, _C.I.G._ i. 140, 141, 150 = _B.M. Inscrs._ 27–29.

Footnote 676:

  So called from being turned (????es?a?) on the wheel (Athen. xi. 480
  B). The word constantly occurs in literature: Phokyl. 11; Sappho, 5;
  Hdt. iv. 70, etc.

Footnote 677:

  _E.g._ B.M. E 49, 50. Cf. Hermippus _apud_ Athen. xi. 480 E, and the
  Ficoroni cista (Roscher, i. p. 527).

Footnote 678:

  xi. 480 C (quoting Pindar).

Footnote 679:

  See p. 215.

Footnote 680:

  Athen. xi. 480 E.

Footnote 681:

  This was also done in the case of some late Italian fabrics; see
  _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, iv. p. 25 and below, p. 501.

Footnote 682:

  xi. 470 E, 471 D; cf. v. 199 B.

Footnote 683:

  xi. 469 B. In § 464 C he speaks of ??d?a?a? ??t??de?, which lessened
  the tendency to inebriety, and in § 496 F he describes a cup called
  ??d?a?.

Footnote 684:

  Pollux, vi. 95–98; x. 66.

Footnote 685:

  Ar. _Lys._ 203.

Footnote 686:

  B 379–82.

Footnote 687:

  A recent writer (Böhlau, in _Athen. Mitth._ for 1900, p. 40 ff.)
  attributes this shape to an Ionic origin.

Footnote 688:

  See generally Athen. xi. 501 ff. Isidorus (_Etym._ xx. 5) says:
  “Phyalae dictae quod ex vitro fiant” (_sc._ ?a???).

Footnote 689:

  The words ßa?a??t?, ßa?a?e??µfa???, and ?a???t? also seem to be
  descriptive of this type. Phialae (?a???ta?) dedicated to Agathe
  Tyche, Themis, Leto, and Hekate, were among the possessions of the
  temple of Apollo at Branchidae (Boeckh, _C.I.G._ ii. 2852).

Footnote 690:

  G 117, 118: see Plate XLVIII.

Footnote 691:

  _Il._ xxiii. 270, where it is described as ?p???t??, implying that it
  was used over a fire.

Footnote 692:

  _Ibid._ l. 243.

Footnote 693:

  _Rhet._ iii. 4: cf. Athen. x. 433 C.

Footnote 694:

  See Athen. xi. _s.vv._; also Pollux, vi. 98.

Footnote 695:

  Schol. _in_ Ar. _Pac._ 916.

Footnote 696:

  Cf. B.M. E 784–803.

Footnote 697:

  See for a discussion of this word, Athen. xi. 476 A.

Footnote 698:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 42, 46, 181, 204, etc.

Footnote 699:

  xi. 461 B, 497 B.

Footnote 700:

  d?atet??µ????, Athen. xi. 497 E.

Footnote 701:

  Exx. in B.M. F 417–36.

Footnote 702:

  xi. 500 E. In the temple of Apollo at Branchidae there were
  pa??µp?t??, t?a???af??, p??t?µ??, with dedicatory inscriptions to
  Apollo and Artemis; evidently _rhyta_ of this kind (Boeckh, _C.I.G._
  ii. 2852). An example in the B.M. (F 431) ends in the heads of a boar
  and dog conjoined.

Footnote 703:

  xi. 468 F; cf. 497 A.

Footnote 704:

  xi. 496 E; other names for the rhyton are d????a? (Pollux, vi. 97),
  ???a?t??, ??µ??, and pa??µp?t??: see note 702.

Footnote 705:

  _In Meid._ 565 fin.

Footnote 706:

  See p. 127 and Plate X.

Footnote 707:

  Pollux, vi. 84–5; x. 86; Ar. _passim_; Lucian, _Somn._ 14, p. 723
  (t??ß????); see Ussing, _De nom. vas. graec._ p. 160 ff.

Footnote 708:

  Schöne in _Comm. phil. in hon. Mommseni_, p. 653, mentions a plate
  with ??T??? inscribed underneath. Cf. also Plate XLIV. and p. 487.

Footnote 709:

  See p. 139.

Footnote 710:

  Pollux, vi. 85; x. 86; Ar. _Ran._ 1440, _Plut._ 812, _Av._ 361;
  Athen. ii. 67 D, xi. 494 C. Cf. for these words Chapter XVII.

Footnote 711:

  x. 92. Liddell and Scott state that ??e?? is a _vox nihili_.

Footnote 712:

  Pollux, x. 93.

Footnote 713:

  xi. 476 E.

Footnote 714:

  See _Brit. School Annual_, iii. (1896–97) p. 58; _Ath. Mitth._ 1898,
  p. 271; Couve in Daremberg and Saglio’s _Dict. s.v._ Kernos.
  Athenaeus cannot have known this type.

Footnote 715:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1898, pls. 13, 14; _Ephem. Arch._ 1885, pl. 9, 1897, p.
  163 ff.

Footnote 716:

  _Ath. Mitth._ _loc. cit._ p. 295.

Footnote 717:

  See _Jahrbuch_, 1894, p. 57 ff.

Footnote 718:

  Cf. Dem. _Fals. Leg._ p. 415, and p. 133 above.

Footnote 719:

  Athen. xi. 784 B.

Footnote 720:

  See Pollux, vii. 166; x. 63.

Footnote 721:

  xi. 783 F; he derives the -ßa???? from ßa???t??? (_sic_). He also
  says it is like the a??st????, and that ???st?? = p??????.

Footnote 722:

  See Athen. xi. 784 D; Pollux, vi. 98; Hippokrates, 494, 55.

Footnote 723:

  He somewhat vaguely identifies it with the Thericleian and Rhodian
  kylikes. Pollux (vi. 98) also implies it to be a cup.

Footnote 724:

  See Ussing, p. 117; Pollux, vi. 106, x. 121; Ar. _Ach._ 1063.

Footnote 725:

  Hesych. _s.v._ ??µµa. Also called sµ?µat?d????.

Footnote 726:

  _E.g._ B.M. 208, 225, 376, 386, 794, 810, D 65. But see on this shape
  Pernice in _Jahrbuch_, 1899, p. 68, and Robinson in _Boston Mus.
  Report_, 1899, p. 73. The latter rejects Pernice’s incense-burner
  theory (see above, p. 140), and suggests their use for perfume or
  scented water.

Footnote 727:

  The B.M. has a late B.F. example, B 298.

Footnote 728:

  _Jahrbuch___, 1899, p. 129.

Footnote 729:

  E 774; E 810 in the B.M. is a good example of this form.

Footnote 730:

  It was formerly thought to be a kind of roof-tile. See Robert in ?f.
  ???. 1892, p. 247; B.M. B 597, 598; Athens 1588–92.

Footnote 731:

  See _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, iii. p. 17.

Footnote 732:

  See _op. cit._ iv. p. 8, fig. 18.

Footnote 733:

  In the examples from Greek sites, such as the Cyrenaica, the handle
  is arched over the back, as in Fig. 62.

Footnote 734:

  For the Mycenaean “false amphora,” a variation of the askos, see p.
  271 and Plate XV.

Footnote 735:

  See Chapter XI. for a general discussion of the subject, and Chapter
  V. for its technical aspect.

Footnote 736:

  _B.M. Cat. of Terracottas_, D 204 ff.

Footnote 737:

  See p. 88; also _B.M. Cat. of Terracottas_, D 1–2; _Röm. Mitth._
  1897, p. 262.

Footnote 738:

  _Cat. of Terracottas_, D 209–10.




                               CHAPTER V
                          _TECHNICAL PROCESSES_

    Nature of clay—Places whence obtained—Hand-made vases—Invention
      of potter’s wheel—Methods of modelling—Moulded vases and
      relief-decoration—Baking—Potteries and furnaces—Painted vases
      and their classification—Black varnish—Methods of
      painting—Instruments and colours employed—Status of potters in
      antiquity.


In this chapter we propose to deal with the various technical processes
required for the manufacture of painted vases, that being of all the
methods of working in clay employed by the Greeks the most important,
and thus, as already implied, forming the main branch of our subject.
These vases show, in fact, the highest point of perfection to which the
ceramic art attained.

In the making of Greek vases we can distinguish four separate stages:
(1) Preparation of the clay; (2) Modelling (_a_) on the wheel, (_b_) by
hand, or (_c_) from a mould; (3) Baking; (4) Painting, glazing, and
other decoration. The last-named is not absolutely essential, _i.e._ a
vase, especially one for ordinary daily use, may be considered complete
without it. Further, the three first stages are practically the same at
all periods of Greek art, whereas the systems of painting and
decoration are subject to local variations and chronological
development. For the purposes of the present chapter it is sufficient
to consider only those vases which have undergone the complete process
of manufacture, or what are known for the purposes of study as “Painted
Greek Vases.”

                       1. PREPARATION OF THE CLAY

The paste of these vases is similar to terracotta in its general
characteristics, such as the constitution of the mixture of which it is
composed; it is in general very delicate, but deeper in tone and finer
in texture than that of the terracottas. Brongniart has described it as
“tender, easily scratched or cut with a knife, remarkably fine and
homogeneous, but of loose texture”[739]; but it would be more accurate
to say that it varies in one respect, being sometimes so hard that
cutting or scratching has no effect upon it. When broken it exhibits a
dull opaque colour, varying from red to yellow and yellow to grey. On
being struck it gives forth a dull metallic sound; it is exceedingly
porous, and easily allows water to ooze through.

The surface was protected by a fine, thin alkaline glaze, which is
semi-transparent, enhancing the colours with which the vase was
painted, like the varnish of a picture. It is this glaze which forms
the special distinction of the Greek painted vases and renders them, in
contradistinction to common pottery or earthenware, the counterpart of
the medieval faïences or majolicas, or the finer porcelain of the
present day.

As to the chemical composition of the paste, it would seem that
hitherto investigations have been confined to vases of Italian origin,
but probably those found on Greek soil would yield similar results. The
principal ingredients are clay, silicic acid, and iron oxide, with
slight admixtures of carbonate of lime and magnesia. The principal
results of previous investigations have been tabulated by Blümner,[740]
and yield the following average result (chiefly from analyses of vases
from Southern Italy):—

                      Silicic acid 52 to 60 parts.
                      Clay earth   13 to 19 parts.
                      Chalk         5 to 10 parts.
                      Magnesia      1 to  3 parts.
                      Iron oxide   12 to 19 parts.

The largest proportion of clay found in any one vase was 27 parts;
there was also one instance given of 24 parts of iron oxide.

The variations in tone of the clay of Greek vases are very marked. The
usual colour is an ochre varying from yellowish-white to brownish-red,
the mean being a sort of orange. These variations were apparently
regulated by the amount of iron oxide employed. It has been noted by
Jahn[741] that vases were sometimes moulded “double,” _i.e._ turned on
the wheel in two different thicknesses of clay, the finer and ruddier
forming the exterior surface for decoration.

The earliest and most primitive Greek vases (including those of the
Mycenaean period) in most cases exhibit the natural quality of the
clay, ranging from yellow to grey in colour; it is usually coarse and
insufficiently baked, and protected by no lustrous glaze. In the early
archaic vases, such as those of Melos, Athens, and Rhodes, we observe a
pale yellow tone, which is apparently not a glaze, but inherent in the
clay.[742] Thenceforward the clay becomes appreciably redder and warmer
in tone until the lustrous glaze reaches its perfection in the Attic
vases of the fifth century. In the later Italian fabrics again there is
a great degeneration, the clay rapidly reverting to a paler hue,
especially in the vases of Campania; while in the Etruscan imitations
of the third century it is a dull coarse yellow, apparently due to a
preponderance of lime. Generally speaking, it may be said that the
colour depends on the proportion in which the constituent parts are
mixed, a larger proportion of iron oxide producing a redder, a larger
proportion of lime a paler hue.

The clay is permeable, allowing water to exude when not glazed, and
when moistened emits a strong earthy smell. It is not known how this
paste was prepared, for the Greeks have left few or no details of their
processes, but it has been conjectured that the clay was fined by
pouring it into a series of vats, and constantly decanting the water,
so that the last vat held only the finest particles in suspension. The
clay was worked up to the right consistency with the hands, and is
supposed to have been ground in a mill or trodden out with the feet.
Either red or white clay, or a mixture of the two, was preferred by the
ancients, according to the nature of the pottery required to be made,
as we learn from an interesting passage in the _Geoponica_:—“All kinds
of earth are not suited for pottery, but some prefer the reddish
variety, others the white; others again blend the two ... but the
potter ought personally to assist in the operations and see that the
clay is well levigated and not placed on the wheel until he has
obtained a clear idea of the probable appearance of the jar after the
baking” (vi. 3).

Certain sites enjoyed in antiquity great reputation for their clays.
One of the most celebrated was that procured from a mine near the
promontory of Cape Kolias,[743] close to Phaleron, from which was
produced the paste which gave so much renown to the products of the
Athenian Kerameikos. The vases made of it became so fashionable, that
Plutarch[744] relates an anecdote of a person who, having swallowed
poison, refused to drink the antidote except out of a vessel made of
this clay. It seems to have been of a fine quality, but not remarkably
warm in tone when submitted to the furnace; ruddle, or red ochre
(_rubrica_), being employed to impart to it that rich deep orange glow
which distinguishes the finest vases of the best period.[745]
Corinth,[746] Knidos, Samos, and various other places famous for their
potteries, were provided with fine clays. At Koptos, in Egypt, and in
Rhodes, vases were manufactured of an aromatic earth.[747] The extreme
lightness of the paste of these vases was remarked by the ancients, and
its tenuity is mentioned by Plutarch.[748] That it was an object of
ambition to excel in this respect, appears from the two amphorae
mentioned by Pliny as preserved in the temple of Erythrae,[749] of
extreme lightness and thinness, made by a potter and his pupil when
contending which could produce the lightest vase. The thinnest vases
which have come down to us are scarcely thicker than pieces of stout
paper. Great difference is to be observed in the pastes of vases from
widely-separated localities, due either to the composition or to the
baking, as has been noted in the case of the terracottas (p. 113).

                        2. MANUFACTURE OF VASES

The earliest glazed vases were made with the hand, but the wheel was an
invention of very remote antiquity, as has been noted in our
Introductory Chapter. It is generally supposed that its origin is to be
attributed to Egypt. Its introduction into Greece may easily be traced
by a study of primitive pottery from any site such as Crete, Cyprus, or
Troy, where the distinction between hand-made and wheel-made vessels is
clear. Thus in the tombs of Cyprus which belong to the Bronze Age, the
earlier finds, dating from about 2500–1500 B.C., are exclusively of
hand-made pottery.[750] The latter part of the Bronze Age may be
regarded as a transitional period, in which the tombs contain hand-made
unglazed painted vases, together with pottery of a much more developed
character, with a lustrous yellow glaze, bearing unmistakable evidence
of having been turned on a wheel. This pottery appears to be largely
imported, as opposed to the local wares, which are still hand-made, and
its widespread distribution over the whole of the “Aegean” area marks
an important epoch in the history of early ceramics (see Chapter VI.).
It covers the period from 1500 to about 900 B.C., and it is to this
time that we may attribute the general use of the potter’s wheel in
Greece, although it was known even earlier, as some isolated specimens
prove.

Among the Greeks there were many contending claims for the honour of
having invented the potter’s wheel. Tradition attributed it to various
personages, such as Daedalos,[751] or his nephew and rival Talos[752];
Hyperbios of Corinth[753]; Koroibos of Athens; and Anacharsis the
Scythian.[754] Kritias, the comic poet, claimed the invention for
Athens—“that city which ... invented pottery, the famous offspring of
the wheel, of earth, and of fire.”[755] There is also a familiar
allusion to it in Homer,[756] which is a fair testimony to its
antiquity:—

  “Full lightly, as when some potter sitteth and maketh assay
  Of the wheel to his hands well-fitted, to know if it runneth true.”

As regards the traditions, even Strabo[757] realised their absurdity,
when he asked, “How could the wheel be the invention of Anacharsis,
when his predecessor Homer knew of it?” On the other hand, Poseidonios
adheres to the tradition, maintaining that the passage in Homer is an
interpolation.[758] Other allusions to the wheel are in the writings of
Plato[759] and the comic poet Antiphanes.[760]

[Illustration: FIG. 65. POTTER’S WHEEL (FROM A PAINTING OF ABOUT 600
B.C.).]

Among the Egyptians and Greeks the wheel took the form of a low
circular table, turned with the hand, not as nowadays with the
foot.[761] The assumption that the wheel was turned with the foot is
only supported by one passage in the Book of Ecclesiasticus[762]; the
evidence of Plutarch[763] and Hippokrates[764] tells decidedly against
it. In 1840 some discs of terracotta, strengthened with spokes and a
leaden tire, came to light on the site of the ancient potteries at
Arezzo, and these had evidently been used as potter’s wheels.[765] The
process is also represented on two or three vases, as on a Corinthian
painted tablet of about 600 B.C. (Fig. 65),[766] on a kylix in the
British Museum (B 433), on a B.F. hydria in Munich (Fig. 67 _b_,
below), and on a R.F. fragment from the Acropolis of Athens (Fig.
66),[767] which shows a man modelling the foot of a large krater, while
a boy or slave turns the wheel, as on the Munich vase. On the British
Museum cup the potter is seated on a low stool, apparently modelling a
vase which he has just turned into shape on the wheel.

[Illustration: FIG. 66. POTTER’S WHEEL (FROM A VASE OF ABOUT 500 B.C.).]

In making the vases the wheel was used in the following manner:—A piece
of paste of the required size was placed upon it vertically in the
centre, and while it revolved was formed with the finger and thumb, the
potter paying regard not only to the production of the right shape, but
to the necessary thickness of the walls. This process sufficed for the
smaller pieces, such as cups or jugs; the larger amphorae and hydriae
required the introduction of the arm. The feet, necks, mouths, and
handles were separately turned on moulds, and fixed on while the clay
was moist. They are often modelled with great beauty and precision,
especially the feet, which are admirably finished off, to effect which
the vase must have been inverted. The modelling and separate attachment
of the handle is represented in more than one ancient work of art (see
Fig. 66). In many cases the joining of the handles is so excellent that
it is easier to break than to detach them. Great technical skill was
displayed in turning certain peculiar forms of vases, and generally
speaking the Greeks with their simple wheel effected wonders, producing
shapes still unrivalled for beauty.

In the case of the earlier vases, which are made by hand, after the
clay was properly kneaded the potter took up a mass of the paste, and
hollowing it into the shape of walls with one hand, placed the other
inside it and pressed it out into the required form. In this way also
the thickness of the walls could be regulated. When raised or incised
ornaments were required, he used modeller’s tools, such as wooden or
bronze chisels. The largest and coarsest vases of the Greeks were made
with the hand, and the large p????, or casks, such as have been
recently found in such numbers in Crete and Thera (p. 152), were
modelled by the aid of a kind of hooped mould (????aß??): see _ibid._).
The smaller and finer vases, however, were invariably turned on the
wheel. On a Graeco-Roman lamp from Pozzuoli, in the British
Museum,[768] a potter is seen standing and modelling a vase before his
furnace, in the manner no doubt employed at all periods.

Certain parts of the ancient painted vases were modelled by the potter
from the earliest times—_e.g._ on those of the Geometrical period
horses are occasionally found on the covers of the flat dishes moulded
in full relief, and in other examples the handle is enriched with the
moulded figure of a serpent twining round it. This kind of ornament is
more suitable to works in metal than in clay, and suggests the idea
that such vases were, in fact, imitations of metallic ones. On vases of
all periods moulded bosses and heads, like the reliefs on metal vases,
are sometimes found; even in black-figured vases the insertions of the
handles of hydriae and oinochoae are occasionally thus enriched. In the
later styles modelling was more profusely employed; small projecting
heads were affixed to the handles of jugs[769] at their tops and bases,
and on the large kraters found in Apulia the discs in which the handles
terminated (see above, p. 171) were ornamented with heads of the Gorgon
Medusa, or with such subjects as Satyrs and Maenads. These portions
were sometimes covered with the black varnish used for the body of the
vase, but frequently they were painted with white and red colours of
the opaque kind.

A peculiar kind of modelling was used for the gilded portions of
reliefs, introduced over the black varnish. When the vase was baked a
fine clay was applied to the parts intended for gilding and delicately
modelled, either with a small tool or a brush, a process similar to
that adopted in the Roman red ware (_en barbotine_, see Chapter XXI.).
It may indeed have been squeezed in a fluid state through a tube upon
the vase, and then modelled. As the gilded-portions are generally
small, this process was not difficult or important. A vase discovered
at Cumae[770] has two friezes executed in this style, the upper round
the neck, representing the Eleusinian deities, delicately modelled,
coloured, and with the flesh completely gilded; the lower one consists
of a band of animals and arabesque ornaments. Several vases from the
same locality, from Capua and from the Cyrenaica, have wreaths of corn,
ivy, or myrtle, and necklaces round the neck, modelled in the same
style, while the rest is plain.

But the art of modelling was soon extensively superseded by that of
_moulding_, or producing several impressions from a mould, generally
itself of terracotta. The subject was in the first place modelled in
relief with considerable care; and from this model a cast in clay was
taken and then baked. The potter availed himself of moulds for various
purposes. From them he produced entire parts of his vase in full
relief, such as the handles, and possibly in some instances the feet.
He also stamped out certain ornaments in relief, much in the same
manner as the ornaments of cakes are prepared, and fixed them while
moist to the still damp body of the vase. Such ornaments were
principally placed upon the lips or at the base of the handles, and in
the interior of the _kylikes_ or cups of a late style. A late bowl of
black glazed ware in the British Museum (see Plate XLVIII.) contains an
impression from one of the later Syracusan decadrachms having for its
subject the head of Persephone surrounded by dolphins: it was struck
about 370 B.C. by Euainetos.[771]

The last method to be described is that of producing the entire vase
from a mould by stamping it out, a process extensively adopted in Roman
pottery. During the best period of the fictile art, while painting
flourished, such vases were very rare; but on the introduction of a
taste for magnificent vases of chased metal, the potters endeavoured to
meet the public taste by imitating the reliefs of metal ware.

The most remarkable of these moulded vases are the _rhyta_ or
drinking-horns, the bodies of which terminate in the heads of animals,
produced from a mould (see above, p. 192). By the same process were
also made vases in the form of jugs or lekythi, the bodies of which are
moulded in the shape of human heads, and sometimes glazed, while the
necks were fashioned on the lathe, and the handles added. These were
coloured and ornamented on the same principle as the rhyta, the
vase-portion being generally covered with a black glaze, but sometimes
with a white slip, after the manner of the terracottas. Besides the
rhyta, _phialae_, or saucers, were also moulded; fine examples of which
process may be seen on the flat bossed saucers, or _phialae
mesomphaloi_, discussed in Chapter XI., p. 502.

Amphorae and other vases of late black ware, the bodies of which are
reeded, were also evidently produced from moulds, and could not be made
by the expensive process of modelling. Of smaller dimensions, but also
made by moulding, were the vases known as _gutti_, or “lamp-feeders”
(see above, p. 200). They have reeded bodies, long-necked mouths, and
circular handles; and on their upper surface a small circular medallion
in bas-relief, with a mythological subject. Such vases are principally
found in Southern Italy and in Sicily, and belong to the second century
B.C. (Chapter XI., p. 502). After being moulded they were entirely
covered with a black glaze. Other vases again are entirely moulded in
human or animal forms, with a small mouth or spout. These are found at
all periods, but chiefly in the archaic Rhodian and Corinthian fabrics,
and again reviving in the later stages of vase-fabrics in Southern
Italy. Examples may be seen in the First Vase Room (Cases 33–34 and F)
and Fourth Vase Room (Case B) of the British Museum: see also Plate
XLVI. Others again retain the form of the jug or _lekythos_, with a
figure or relief attached to the front of the body and coloured or
covered with a white slip, while the back is varnished black. The whole
subject is treated in fuller detail in Chapter XI.

Many vases of the fourth century and later are entirely covered with a
coating of black glaze, while rows of small stamped ornaments,
apparently made with a metal punch, have been impressed on the wet clay
before the glaze was applied. These decorations are unimportant in
their subjects, which are generally small Gorgons’ heads, tendrils, or
palmettes, and hatched bands, arranged round the axis of the vase. This
latter ornament was probably produced by rolling the edge of a disc
notched for the purpose round the vase, in the same manner as a
bookbinder uses his brass punch. When these vases came into use the
potter’s trade had ceased to be artistic, and was essentially
mechanical. They are found on almost all sites from Cyprus to
Italy.[772]

                  *       *       *       *       *

After the vases had been made on the wheel they were duly dried in the
sun[773] and lightly baked, after which they were ready for varnishing
and painting; it is evident that they could not be painted while wet
and soft. Moreover the glaze ran best on a surface already baked. It is
also probable that the glaze was brought out by a process of polishing,
the surface of the clay being smoothed by means of a small piece of
wood or hard leather. At all events this seems the most satisfactory
interpretation of a vase-painting in Berlin (Fig. 67_a_),[774] where a
boy is seen applying a tool of some kind to the outer surface of a
completed vase (_kotyle_); that the vase is not yet varnished is shown
by its being left in a red colour, while two others, varnished black
all over, stand on the steps of an oven close by, probably to dry after
the application of the varnish.

[Illustration: FIG. 67. (_a_) CUP IN BERLIN WITH BOY POLISHING VASE;
(_b_) HYDRIA IN MUNICH: INTERIOR OF POTTERY.]

Many vases, whether decorated with designs or not, are varnished black
throughout the exterior, except the feet and lips, and we cannot be
certain whether or not any glaze had been previously applied to the
surface; but in respect of the red-figured vases, it is clear from the
method employed (see p. 221) that they were originally glazed
throughout.

This lustrous glaze is, like the black varnish, now quite a lost art.
Seen under a microscope it has evidently been fused by baking; it
yields neither to acids nor the blow-pipe. It is remarkably fine and
thin, insomuch that it can only be analysed with great difficulty. No
lead entered into its composition. It is however far inferior to modern
glazes, being permeable by water; but it is not decomposed by the same
chemical agents. On the later R.F. vases it is of decidedly inferior
quality, and often scales away, carrying the superimposed colours with
it.[775]

                         3. THE BAKING OF VASES

The process of baking (?pt??, _coquere_) was regarded as one of the
most critical in the potter’s art. It was not indeed universal, as
Plato[776] distinguishes between vases which have or have not been
exposed to the action of fire (?µp??a and ?p??a), and Pliny[777] speaks
of _fictile crudum_ (?µ??) used for medicinal purposes. But all the
vases that have come down to us have certainly been baked. The
necessary amount of heat required was regulated by the character of the
ware, and in the case of most Greek fabrics it appears to have been
high. Many examples exist of discoloured vases which have been
subjected to too much or too little heat, and in which the varnish has
acquired a greenish or reddish hue. On the other hand, in some of those
that have been subjected to subsequent burning, the red glaze has
turned to an ashen-grey colour,[778] the black remaining unimpaired;
but there are also instances of the varnish peeling off, the red colour
alone preserving the outline of the figures.

Other accidents were liable to befall them in the baking, such as the
cracking of the vase under too great heat; this produced an effect
expressed by the term p?????a??? or f????, words which seem to have
some reference to the _sound_ of a cracked pot.[779] Or the shape of a
vase might be damaged while it was yet soft, one knocking against
another and denting its side, or crushing the lip through being
carelessly superimposed. On a R.F. amphora in the British Museum (E
295) a dent has been caused by the pressure of another vase, which has
left traces of a band of maeanders. This probably happened when the
vases were in the kiln for the second firing. The quality of the baking
was tested by tapping the walls of the vase.[780]

These misfortunes were attributed to the action of malicious demons,
whose influence had to be counteracted in various ways; thus, for
instance, a Satyric or grotesque head was placed in front of the
furnace and was supposed to have an apotropaeic effect against the evil
eye.[781] The pseudo-Homeric hymn addressed to the potters of Samos
invokes the protection of Athena for the vases in the furnace, and
mentions the evil spirits which are ready to injure them in the case of
bad faith on the potter’s part. Among the names given are: ?sßest??,
“the Unquenchable”; Sµ??a???, “the Crasher”; S??t???, “the Smasher”;
?µ?daµ??, “the Savage Conqueror.”

The form of the oven probably differed little from those in use at the
present day. No furnaces have been found in Greece, and our only
evidence is derived from the painted vases; but they have been found at
Ruvo[782] and elsewhere in Italy, and also in France, Germany, and
England. Those of Roman date are indeed by no means uncommon, but are
discussed in fuller detail in the corresponding section of the work
(Chapter XXI.).

As depicted on vases and elsewhere, the ancient furnaces seem to have
been of simple construction, tall conical ovens fed by fires from
beneath, into which the vases were placed with a long shovel resembling
a baker’s peel. The kilns were heated with charcoal or wood fuel, and
in some of the representations of them we see men holding long
instruments with which they are about to poke or rake the fires (Fig.
68). They had two doors, one for the insertion of the vases and one for
the potter to watch the progress of the baking. For vases of great
size, like the huge p????, special ovens must have been necessary; and
we have a representation on a Corinthian pinax[783] of such an oven,
the roof of which resembles the upper part of a large _pithos_
surrounded by flames.

[Illustration: FIG. 68. SEILENOS AS POTTER.]

On the lamp from Pozzuoli in the British Museum, referred to on p. 209,
there is a curious subject in relief, representing a potter about to
place a vase in an oven with a tall chimney; and on a hydria at
Munich[784] (Fig. 67 _b_) a man is about to place an amphora in a kiln,
while other jars (painted white) stand ready to be baked. But for our
purposes the Corinthian pinakes are even more valuable for the
information they afford. There are several representing the exterior of
the conical furnace, with men standing by watching the fires and
tending them with rakes[785]; in another we have a bird’s-eye view in
horizontal section of the interior of an oven, filled with jugs of
various forms (Fig. 69). Flames are usually indicated rising from
underneath the ovens.[786]

[Illustration: FIG. 69. INTERIOR OF FURNACE (FROM CORINTHIAN PINAX)]

The Munich hydria (Fig. 67_b_) reproduces the interior of a potter’s
workshop with such detail that a full description of the scene may be
permissible.[787] On the left of the picture a seated man seems to be
examining an amphora, which has just been finished (it is painted
black) and is brought up for his approval. Next is seen an amphora on
the potter’s wheel, painted white to indicate its imperfect state; one
man places his arm inside to shape the interior, while another turns
the wheel for him. On their right another white amphora is being
carried out, just fresh from the wheel, but without handles or mouth,
to be dried in the open or at the furnace; next is another standing on
the ground to dry. On the right of the scene stands the foreman or
master of the pottery, before whom a nude man carries what has been
thought to be a sack of coals for the furnace, which is seen on the
extreme right.

Even more vivid and instructive, in spite of its careless execution, is
the painting on a kotyle found at Exarchos or Abae in Lokris, and now
in the Athens Museum (Fig. 70).[788] The style is that of the imitation
B.F. vases found in the temple of the Kabeiri at Thebes, late in the
fifth century. We see represented the interior of a potter’s workshop,
in which the master of the business sits holding up a kylix in one
hand, while with the other he threatens a slave, who runs off with
three kotylae ready for the furnace; three similar kotylae stand by the
master’s feet, and behind him are two more vases on a shelf. On the
right of the scene a workman sits at a table on which is a pot full of
paint, with a brush in it; he holds up a newly-painted kotyle, admiring
his workmanship. The picture is completed by a realistic representation
of an unfortunate slave suspended by cords to the ceiling as a
punishment for some offence, while another belabours him with a leather
thong.

[Illustration: FIG. 70. INTERIOR OF POTTERY.]

It would appear that the vases after the baking were often placed on
the exterior of the furnace, either to prevent the too rapid cooling of
the clay, or (as indicated on the Berlin cup) for the pigments to dry.
Jahn and others have published a gem[789] on which a small two-handled
vase is placed on the top of an oven, and a youth is applying two
sticks to it, perhaps in order to take it down without injury by the
contact of the hand. A companion gem,[790] on which an artist is
painting a similar jar, shows a jug and a kylix standing on a kiln.

When the vases were returned from the furnace, the potter appears to
have made good as far as possible the defects of those not absolutely
spoiled; and if naturally or by accident any parts remained too pale
after the baking, the defect was remedied by rubbing them over with a
deep red ochre, which supplied the necessary tone.

                              4. PAINTING

We may distinguish three principal classes of painted pottery, of which
one at least admits of several subdivisions:—

(1) Primitive Greek vases, with simple painted ornaments, chiefly
linear and geometrical, laid directly on the ground of the clay with
the brush. The colour employed is usually a yellowish or brownish red,
passing into black. The execution varies, but is often extremely coarse.

(2) Greek vases (and Italian imitations) painted with figures. These
may be subdivided as follows:—

   (_a_) Vases with figures in black varnish on red glazed ground (see
      Frontispiece, Vol. II.);

   (_b_) Vases with figures left in the red glaze on a ground of black
      varnish (see Frontispiece, Vol. I.).

(3) (_a_) Vases of various dates with outline or polychrome decoration
      on white ground (see Plate XLIII.);

   (_b_) Vases (also of various dates) with designs in opaque colour on
      black ground.

Of these, the second group is by far the largest and most important,
and the complicated and technical processes which it involved will
demand by far the greater share of our attention in the following
account of the methods of painting. In both the classes (_a_) and (_b_)
the colouring is almost confined to a contrasting of the red glazed
ground of the clay with a black varnish-like pigment, a contrast which
perhaps more than anything else furnishes the great charm of a Greek
vase.

This black varnish is particularly lustrous and deep, but varies under
different circumstances. Great difference of opinion has always existed
as to its nature, and the method by which it was brought to such
perfection by the Greeks. The variations in its appearance are due
partly to differences of locality and fabric, partly to accidents of
production. It is seen in its greatest perfection in the so-called
Nolan amphorae of the severe red-figure period; and at its worst in the
Etruscan and Italiote imitations of Greek fabrics. On the vases found
at Vulci it shows a tendency to assume a greenish hue, as opposed to
the blue-black of the Nolan vases, while variations in the direction of
red, brown, and (on late South Italy fabrics) grey are of frequent
occurrence. It is probable that these gradations of quality are mainly
due to the action of fire, according as a higher or lower temperature
was employed. On the other hand, the ashen-grey hue which vases of all
periods sometimes assume[791] seems to be due to the direct action of
fire in contact with them, and this may perhaps be explained by
supposing that they had been burnt on a funeral pyre. This varnish also
varies in the thickness with which it was laid on, as can be easily
detected with the finger.

Although the chemical action of the earth sometimes causes the black
varnish to disappear entirely, leaving only the figures faintly
indicated on the red-clay ground, there has never yet been found any
acid which has any effect upon it.[792] Various opinions have been
promulgated, from Caylus downwards, as to the elements of which it is
composed.[793] Brongniart[794] has analysed it with the following
results:—

                       Silicic acid 46·30   50·00
                       Clay earth   11·90
                       Iron oxide   16·70   17·00
                       Chalk         5·70
                       Magnesia      2·30
                       Soda         17·10
                       Copper             traces.

It is unnecessary here to enter in detail into the numerous other
theories of its composition, but so far it cannot be said that any
certainty has been attained.

Turning now to the methods by which the black varnish was applied, we
find it necessary to distinguish between the two classes of
black-figured and red-figured vases; some vases, of course, are
completely covered with it, having no painted design, but these do not
enter into the question.

In the black-figured vases the figures are painted in black silhouette
on the red ground of the vase, the outlines being first roughly
indicated by a pointed instrument making a faint line.[795] The surface
within these outlines was then filled in with the black pigment by
means of a brush, the details of anatomy, drapery, armour, etc., being
subsequently brought out in part by further incising of lines with a
pointed tool. In some of the finest vases, such as those of Amasis and
Exekias (p. 381), the delicacy and minuteness of these lines is brought
to an extraordinary pitch of perfection. After a second baking had
taken place, the designs were further enriched by the application of
opaque purple and white pigments, usually following certain
conventional principles, the flesh of women and devices on shields, for
instance, being always white, folds of drapery always purple. A third
baking at a much lower heat was necessary to fix these colours, and the
vase was then complete.

It should here be noted that there are really two subdivisions of these
black-figured vases, which may be termed for convenience “red-bodied”
and “black-bodied.”[796] In the former the whole vase stands out in the
natural red colour of the clay; whereas in the latter the treatment
approaches more nearly to the red-figure method which we shall
presently discuss. The whole body of the vase is in these examples
covered with the black varnish, with the exception of a framed panel of
red, on which the figures are painted. This distinction may be well
observed in the Second Vase Room of the British Museum, where most of
the vases on the east side of the room belong to the former or
“red-bodied” class, while all those on the west side are
“black-bodied,” with designs in panels.

In the red-figured vases the black varnish is used as the background,
and covers the whole vase, as in the “black-bodied” B.F. fabrics, the
figures not being actually painted, but _left red_ in the colour of the
clay. The process was as follows:—Before the varnish was applied the
outlines of the figures were indicated, not by incised lines but by
drawing a thick line of black with a brush round their contours. It is
probable that a fine brush was used at first, especially for more
delicate work, and then a broader brush producing a line about an
eighth of an inch in thickness. The process, be it noted, is more akin
to _drawing_ than painting; and it was as draughtsmen _par excellence_
that the red-figure artists excelled. The next stage was to mark the
inner details by means of very fine black lines (corresponding to the
incised lines of B.F. vases), or by masses of black for surfaces such
as the hair; white and purple were also employed, but far more
sparingly than on the earlier vases. In the late Athenian and South
Italian vases a tendency to polychromy sprang up, but the main process
always remained the same to the final decadence of the art. The figures
being completed and protected from accidents by their broad black
borders, the varnishing of the whole exterior surface was then
proceeded with. This was of course a purely mechanical business. A
fragment of a red-figured vase in the Sèvres Museum forms an excellent
illustration of the method employed, as, although the figures are
finished, the ground has never been filled in, and the original black
border is plainly visible (Fig. 71).

[Illustration: FIG. 71. FRAGMENT OF UNFINISHED RED-FIGURED VASE.]

The result of the second baking was to fix the varnish and cause it to
permeate the surface of the clay in such a way as to become practically
inseparable from it. The subsidiary colours, on the other hand, which
were laid on over the black, are always liable to disappear or fade.

A very interesting representation of painters at work on their vases is
to be seen on a hydria from Ruvo (Fig. 72).[797] Three painters are
seated at work with their brushes, of whom two are being crowned by
Victories, while the third is about to receive a wreath from Athena,
the protecting goddess of the industry. Their paint-pots are to be seen
by their side. At one end of the scene a woman is similarly occupied.

From _Blümner_.

[Illustration: FIG. 72. STUDIO OF VASE-PAINTER.]

In class 3 (_a_), or vases with figures on white ground, we have to
deal with the process of covering the naturally pale clay with a white
slip of more or less thick and creamy consistency, on which the designs
were painted. In the archaic period this process is fairly common,
especially in the earliest vases of Corinth and of Ionia, and at Kyrene
and Naukratis. It was revived at Athens about the end of the sixth
century (see pp. 385, 455). But when once the white slip was laid on,
the technical process differed little from that in use on ordinary
red-ground vases, except for the general avoidance of white as an
accessory; it merely results that instead of a contrast of black and
red, one of black and cream is obtained. The method was one also
largely practised in early painting, as we see in the Corinthian
pinakes and the sarcophagi of Clazomenae (pp. 316, 362).

But there is another class of white-ground vases to which we must
devote more special attention, namely, those on which the figures are
painted either in outline or with polychrome washes on the same white
slip. The earliest instance of such a method is in the series of
fragments found at Naukratis, dating from the beginning of the sixth
century (see p. 348), which technically and artistically are of
remarkably advanced character, and combine the two methods of painting
in outline and in washes of colour. In the fifth century the practice
was revived at Athens as a means of obtaining effective results with
small vases, and became especially characteristic of one class, the
funeral lekythi, which are elsewhere described (Chapter XI.). This,
however, must serve as the most convenient place for a few remarks on
their technique.

The vases, after they had left the wheel and were fitted with handle,
etc., were covered with a coating of white flaky pigment, in
consistency resembling liquid plaster of Paris, or, when dry, pipeclay.
They received this coat of white while still on the wheel, and then a
second coating, of the usual black varnish, was applied to such parts
as were not required for decoration. Usually the white covered the
cylindrical part of the body, and the shoulder up to the neck; black
was applied to the mouth, neck, handle, base of body, and stem. The
clay, it should be noted, is of the ordinary kind, but two varieties
have been distinguished, one of pale red, for light thin vases, the
other of a blackish-grey, for thicker and heavier ware. The natural
colour appears on the inside of the lip and foot. Before being removed
from the wheel the vases were finely polished, which gave to the white
coating a sort of lustrous sheen; they were then fired at a low
temperature.

The method of decoration[798] was usually as follows:—A preliminary
sketch was made with fine grey lines, ignoring draperies (hence the
lines of figures are usually visible _through_ the draperies), but not
always necessarily followed when the colours were laid on. This was
done as soon as the first lines were dry, the colour being applied with
a fine brush and in monochrome—black, yellow, or red—following the
lines of the sketch more or less closely. In the later examples red was
used exclusively, and at all periods at Athens; but in the vases
attributed to Locri and Sicily, a black turning to yellow is used. This
combination of black and yellow is also used on the best Attic vases
for various details, such as eyes and hair. The outlines also served to
indicate the folds of the draperies. For the surfaces of drapery and
other details, polychrome washes were employed, the colour being spread
uniformly by means of a large brush. All varieties of red from rose to
brown are found, also violet, light and brownish yellow, blue, black,
and green. Hair is sometimes treated in outline, sometimes by means of
washes. It is noteworthy that in the later examples the wash-colours
were often painted right over the red lines. On the bodies of the
figures these washes are rare, but in some cases shades of brown are
used for flesh colour, as on the figure of Hypnos on a lekythos in the
British Museum (D 58).

At Athens this polychrome decoration was not indeed limited to the
lekythi, but was extended to the kylix, the pyxis, and other forms, of
which some beautiful examples exist in the British Museum and at
Athens.[799] In these, as in the best of the lekythi, the drawing of
Greek artists seems almost to have reached perfection, and arouses our
wonder yet more when we reflect that everything was done merely by
freehand strokes of the brush. This technique is practically limited to
the period 480–350 B.C.

The subsidiary ornamentation of the lekythi was put on either after the
main design or before, this being immaterial. The lines above the
design can be seen to have been painted on the wheel, as they go all
round the vase; but the palmettes on the shoulder and maeander patterns
above the design do not extend beyond it. After the colouring the vases
appear to have been fired again, and in some cases the white slip was
probably varnished. The details of their manufacture show that the
lekythi were not intended for daily use; the shape is awkward for
handling—the handles, for instance, are obviously not intended for
practical use—and the delicate, lightly baked slip made them too porous
for liquids. Everything tends in the direction of elegance and delicacy.

Our next sub-division consists of vases, chiefly of late date, in which
the decoration is by means of opaque colours laid on the surface of a
vase altogether coated with black varnish or glaze. The process is not
indeed one absolutely unknown in earlier times, for there is the
primitive Kamaraes ware of Crete (p. 266), and also a small series of
archaic vases belonging to the early part of the fifth century (p. 393)
in which this principle is adhered to, the designs being painted in
opaque red or white on the black varnish. The latter seem to show a
development from the black-figure period, to the end of which they
belong, and may have been intended to rival the new red-figure method,
but failed to attain popularity.

We next meet with the process in Southern Italy, where it again appears
as the last effort of a worn-out fashion to flicker into life with
renewed popularity. The centre of this revival, which follows on after
the Apulian vases of the third century, was Gnatia (Fasano), on the
coast of that district. The vases are partly modelled in relief, or
have ornaments in relief attached; the decoration, in white and purple,
is confined to one side only, and is very feeble and limited in its
scope. An apparently local variety, perhaps made in Campania by native
craftsmen, has the figures in opaque red, with details marked by rudely
incised lines.

The Gnatia style was adopted by the Romans in the second century for a
small series of vases inscribed with names of Italian deities, such as
Juno and Vesta (p. 490), and it appears in the method of decoration
known as _en barbotine_ on the pottery of the Empire (see Chapters
XXI., XXIII.).

[Illustration: FIG. 73. VASE-PAINTER VARNISHING CUP ON WHEEL.]

The instruments which were employed for the painting of the vases were
not, as formerly supposed, limited to a metal or reed pen, and a
camel’s-hair brush. It has been recently pointed out in a most
illuminating article by Dr. Hartwig[800] that the lines of black
bordering the figures on red-figured vases are usually double, the
space in between being filled in with varnish thus: [ornament].
Practical experiments have shown that this can be obtained with a
_feather brush_ or pen, drawing the lines separately, not concurrently,
as might be done with a metal pen.[801] The feathers of the snipe were
specially suitable for this purpose, as were also those of the swallow.
It is probable that we see the use of the ordinary brush on the Ruvo
vase-painting already mentioned, but this was no doubt used for filling
in the ground and all parts where the colour was laid on in large
masses. Again, on a fragment from the Athenian Acropolis (Fig. 73)[802]
a man is seen covering the inside of a B.F. kylix with black varnish
while he turns it on the wheel; this is also done with an ordinary
brush. But there is a R.F. kylix,[803] on the interior of which we see
the undoubted use of the feather-brush or pen (Fig. 74). In his left
hand the painter seems to hold the sharp tool for engraving the
outlines of the figures, and with his right he manipulates the
feather-pen which is seen to consist of a small feather inserted in a
wooden holder.

[Illustration: FIG. 74. VASE-PAINTER USING FEATHER-BRUSH.]

It is not likely that this instrument was generally used before the
introduction of the R.F. style; it would hardly have been required
either for the silhouette figures of the B.F. vases or the outlines on
the white ground. According to Hartwig, Andokides, one of the earliest
R.F. artists (about 520 B.C.) was making experiments in the use of the
feather-pen, and in the course of twenty years, in the vases of
Epiktetos and his school, its use had become general. It is not indeed
unknown on B.F. vases, and can be traced in the ornamentation where
fine lines were required, as on the Amasis vase in the Bibliothèque
Nationale.[804] It was probably first used in the more developed Ionic
pottery, but as we have seen had no chance of becoming generally used
until the essentially linear R.F. style came into vogue. The artists
who reached the height of skill in its use were Meidias and the
painters of the delicate little vases of the latter half of the fifth
century, this instrument being also admirably adapted for making the
fine inner lines in which the painters of that period achieved such
success.

Besides the painting-brush and the feather-pen, the other instruments
used in the decoration of vases include the pointed graving-tools
employed for incised lines, modelling-tools for the parts in relief, a
stick for steadying the hand while at work, and a pair of compasses.
The latter were employed for marking circles, as may be clearly seen on
shields on the B.F. vases, where the mark left by the central point of
the compasses is often visible.

The difficulties in the painting of Greek vases must have been
numerous. In the first place, it was necessary for the artist to finish
his sketch with great rapidity, since the clay rapidly absorbed the
colouring matter, and the outlines were required to be bold and
continuous, any joins producing a bad effect. Again, the vases were
often painted while in an upright position, and the artist was obliged
to stoop, rise, and execute his work in these difficult attitudes; nor
could he remove the pencil from any figure which he had once begun. The
eye must have been his only guide. Then, as he was obliged to draw his
outline upon a damp surface, the black colour which he used was
instantly confounded with the tint of the clay. The lines grew broad at
first, and afterwards contracted themselves, leaving but a light trace,
so that the artist could with difficulty discern what he had been
doing. Moreover, the lines, once begun, could not be left off except
where they met other lines which cut or terminated them. Thus, for
example, the profile of a head must have been executed with a single
continuous line, which could not be interrupted till it met the neck;
and in drawing a thigh or leg, the whole outline must have been
finished without taking off the pencil: proceeding from the top
downwards, making use of the point to mark the horizontal lines, and
afterwards rising upwards to finish the opposite side. The drawing was
done entirely by the hand and no pattern used.

The outlines round the figures on R.F. vases were drawn strongly, in
the manner described above, to prevent the background encroaching on
the figure. That this was done while the clay was moist appears by the
outlines uniting, which could not have taken place if the clay had been
dry. It was so difficult to fill in the outlines without alteration,
that they were frequently changed, and sometimes the ground was not
reached, while at others it exceeded the line.

The ancient artists, notwithstanding these difficulties, observed all
the laws of balance and proportion, especially ?s?µet??a, or the law of
equal height of all figures; conveyed expression by means of attitude;
and, by the use of profile, and the introduction of accessories, or
small objects, into the background, contrived to compensate for the
want of perspective.

This latter deficiency was due to the use of flat colours, which did
not allow of shades, and the figures were consequently not seen in
masses distinguished by light and shade, but isolated in the air.
Hence, in order to make the figures distinct, and to express by
attitude all the actions and sentiments required, the artist was
compelled to use profile. The black colour, the choice of which may at
first appear singular, is, after all, the most harmonious, and the best
suited for showing the elegance and purity of the outline; whilst by
its aptness to reveal any defects of shape, it compelled the artist to
be very careful in his drawing.

The colours employed[805] were, as we have seen, remarkably few in
number. Of the black varnish which plays such an important part, and of
its composition we have already spoken. Of the opaque accessory
colours, the white is said by Brongniart[806] to be a carbonate of lime
or fine clay. It is evidently an earth of some kind, and gives no trace
of lead under analysis. The creamy slip of the white-ground vases is of
similar character, and appears to be a kind of pipeclay. It was
probably of the same character as the earth of Melos used by
Polygnotos.[807] The deep purple or crimson, so largely employed on the
Corinthian and early Attic B.F. vases, is known to be an oxide of iron,
an element which entered largely into the red glaze. The yellow found
on the white vases and those of Apulia as an accessory to white is of
an ochrous nature. The red used for outlines on the white lekythi is
probably not vermilion (_minium_), but red ochre (µ??t??, _rubrica_).
Blue and green, which are rarely found, and only on vases of the later
styles, were produced from a basis of copper. On vases from the time of
Euphronios and Brygos (about 480 B.C.) onwards, gilding was
occasionally employed, the process being one which we have already
described (see above, p. 210). Good instances of this process are to be
seen in the fourth-century vases from Capua, which are glazed black
throughout and ornamented solely with gilding.[808] But the gold leaf
has often perished. Besides Capua, these vases are found chiefly in
Athens and the Cyrenaica.

                          5. STATUS OF POTTERS

It now remains to say something respecting the makers of Greek
vases—the potters of antiquity. Unfortunately, however, little is known
of their condition, except that they formed a guild, or fraternity, and
that they amassed considerable fortunes by exporting their products to
the principal emporia of the ancient world. The existence of two
_Kerameikoi_, or pottery districts, at Athens shows the great
commercial importance of the manufacture. In later times there seems to
have been a considerable tendency to division of labour among the
potters, and each man “specialised” in some particular shape; hence we
find them characterised as ??t?e?? and ??t??p?????,[809]
??????p????,[810] ?ad?p????,[811] or ??????p????.[812] It is assumed
that the word ?p???se?, “made,” when found on a vase, indicates the
potter, and not the artist, although it is reasonable to suppose that
when no artist’s name accompanies the formula the potter was at the
same time the painter. On one vase the names of two potters, Glaukytes
and Archikles, are found[813]; one has been supposed to be the
artist’s, but it is more probable they were partners.

By the Athenians, potters were called _Prometheans_,[814] from the
Titan Prometheus, who made man out of clay—which, according to one
myth, was the blood of the Titans, or Giants—and was thus the founder
of the fictile art. It was not, however, much esteemed, although
without doubt the pursuit of it was a lucrative one, and many of the
trade realised large fortunes; in proof of which may be cited the
well-known anecdote of Agathokles,[815] who, at a time when the rich
used plate, was in the habit of mixing earthenware with it at his
table, telling his officers that he formerly made such ware, but that
now, owing to his prudence and valour, he was served in gold—an
anecdote which also suggests that the profession was not highly
esteemed. The guild at Athens was called ?? ?e?aµ???, “of the
potters,”[816] and we also hear of a college of ?e?aµe?? at
Thyateira.[817] However, the competition in the trade was so warm as to
pass into a proverb, and the animosity of some of the rival potters is
even recorded upon the vases.[818] To this spirit are also probably to
be referred many of the tricks of the trade, such as imitations of the
names of makers, and the numerous illegible inscriptions. When the
potter’s establishment—called an _ergasterion_—was large, he employed
under him a number of persons, some of whom were probably free but poor
citizens, whilst others were slaves belonging to him.[819] How the
labour was subdivided there are no means of accurately determining, but
the following hands were probably employed:—(1) A potter, to make the
vase on the wheel; (2) an artist, to trace with a point in outline the
subject of the vase; (3) a painter, who executed the whole subject in
outline, and who probably returned it to No. 2, when incised lines were
required; (4) a modeller, who added such parts of the vase as were
moulded; (5) a fireman, who took the vase to the furnace and brought it
back; (6) a fireman for the furnace; (7) packers, to prepare the vases
for exportation. Hence it may readily be conceived that a large
establishment employed a considerable number of hands, and exhibited an
animated scene of industrial activity.

-----

Footnote 739:

  _Traité_, i. p. 548.

Footnote 740:

  _Technologie_, ii. p. 56.

Footnote 741:

  _Die Malerei_, p. 176.

Footnote 742:

  See Jahn, _Vasens. zu München_, p. cxliv; and Brunn-Lau, _Griech.
  Vasen_, p. 6.

Footnote 743:

  Suidas, _s.v._; Athenaeus, xi. 482 B; Blümner, _Technol._ ii. p. 36.

Footnote 744:

  _De recta audiendi rat._ 9, § 42 D.

Footnote 745:

  Suidas, _s.v._ ?????d?? ?e?aµ?e?; cf. Pliny, _H.N._ xxxv. 152.

Footnote 746:

  For representations of quarrying for clay at Corinth see the pinakes
  at Berlin, _Ant. Denkm._ i. pl. 8, Nos. 7, 23.

Footnote 747:

  Athen. xi. 464 B. C.

Footnote 748:

  _Reg. et Imp. Apophth._ 174 E.

Footnote 749:

  Pliny, _H.N._ xxxv. 161.

Footnote 750:

  Myres in _Cyprus Mus. Cat._ p. 16.

Footnote 751:

  Diod. Sic. iv. 76.

Footnote 752:

  See Frazer, _Pausanias_, note to i. 21, 4.

Footnote 753:

  Pliny, _H.N._ vii. 198; Schol. _ad_ Pind. _Ol._ xiii. 27.

Footnote 754:

  Diog. Laert. i. 105; Suidas, _s.v._ ????a?s??.

Footnote 755:

  Athen. i. 28 C.

Footnote 756:

  _Il._ xviii. 600.

Footnote 757:

  vii. 303.

Footnote 758:

  Seneca, _Ep._ 90, 31.

Footnote 759:

  _Rep._ 420 E.

Footnote 760:

  _Apud_ Athenaeum, x. 449 B.

Footnote 761:

  See Blümner, _Technologie_, ii. p. 38, note 3.

Footnote 762:

  xxxviii. 29: ?e?aµe?? ?a??µe??? ... ?a? s?st??f?? ?? p?s?? a?t??
  t?????.

Footnote 763:

  _De gen. Socr._ 20, p. 588 F.

Footnote 764:

  i. 645 K, quoted by Blümner.

Footnote 765:

  Blümner, ii. p. 39; Jahn in _Ber. d. sächs. Gesellsch_. 1854, p. 40,
  note. See also Chapters XXI.-XXII.

Footnote 766:

  _Ant. Denkm._ i. pl. 8, figs. 17, 18; cf. _Gaz. Arch._ 1880, p. 106.

Footnote 767:

  _Ath. Mitth._ xiv. (1889), p. 157.

Footnote 768:

  Blümner, _Technologie_, ii. p. 51.

Footnote 769:

  As on the vases of Nikosthenes (see below, p. 385; B.M. B 619, 620;
  Louvre F 116, 117).

Footnote 770:

  Reinach, _Répertoire_, i. 11 = Petersburg 525.

Footnote 771:

  Evans, in _Num. Chron._ 3rd Ser. xi. p. 319 = _B.M. Cat._ iv. G 121,
  122.

Footnote 772:

  See for examples _B. M. Cat._ iv. G 87–95.

Footnote 773:

  Cf. Aesop, _Fab._ 166 _a_, _b_.

Footnote 774:

  _Cat._ 2542 = Blümner, _Technologie_, ii. p. 50.

Footnote 775:

  Brongniart, _Traité_, i. p. 552.

Footnote 776:

  _Legg._ iii. 679 A.

Footnote 777:

  _H.N._ xxix. 34.

Footnote 778:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 426, E 459.

Footnote 779:

  Cf. Ar. _Ach._ 933: ??fe? ????? t? ?a? p?????a???. See also Suid.
  _s.v._ p?????a???; Pollux, vii. 164; _Etym. Magn._ p. 798, 17; and
  Schol. _in_ Hom. _Il._ ii. 219. I cannot but think that in the term
  f????, as applied to Thersites' head, there is some correspondence to
  our phrase “crack-brained.” Simonides (_apud_ Athen. xi. 480 D)
  speaks of a f????e???? ???e?? ?????, a term of disputed meaning; but
  a cup of which the brim (?e????) would suggest the shape of a peaked
  head is hardly conceivable; and here again there must surely be some
  notion of sound.

Footnote 780:

  See Blümner, _op. cit._ ii. p. 46.

Footnote 781:

  See Fig. 67 _b_; Berlin 2294; Furtwaengler, in _Jahrbuch_, vi.
  (1891), p. 110, points out that these heads probably represent the
  Kyklopes or demon-attendants of the fire-god Hephaistos. See above,
  p. 105, under p??a????; also Daremberg and Saglio, _art._ Caminus.

Footnote 782:

  Lenormant, _La Grande Grèce_, i. p. 94.

Footnote 783:

  Berlin 802 = _Ant. Denkm._ i. 8, 4.

Footnote 784:

  _Cat._ 731 = Jahn in _Ber. d. sächs. Gesellsch._ 1854, pl. 1, fig. 1,
  p. 27.

Footnote 785:

  A Seilenos in this act appears on a vase in _Sale Cat. Hôtel Drouot_,
  May 11th, 1903, No. 131 (reproduced in Fig. 68).

Footnote 786:

  Examples are: _Ant. Denkm._ i. pl. 8, figs. 12, 19_b_, 22 (in
  Berlin); _Gaz. Arch._ 1880, pp. 105, 106 (in Louvre).

Footnote 787:

  A better drawing has recently been given in Furtwaengler and
  Reichhold, _Gr. Vasenm._ p. 159; but the reproduction in Fig. 67 is
  accurate in all essentials.

Footnote 788:

  _Cat._ 1114 = _Ath. Mitth._ xiv. (1889), p. 151.

Footnote 789:

  See Blümner, ii. p. 52.

Footnote 790:

  _Ibid._

Footnote 791:

  See above, p. 214.

Footnote 792:

  Blümner (ii. p. 75) gives an account of various chemical experiments
  made upon it.

Footnote 793:

  See Blümner, ii. p. 76 ff.

Footnote 794:

  _Traité_, i. p. 550.

Footnote 795:

  This process is well illustrated on certain vases (_e.g._ B 158 in
  Brit. Mus.), where the artist has subsequently altered his design,
  and the lines still remain visible.

Footnote 796:

  See for a fuller consideration of this point p. 368.

Footnote 797:

  Baumeister, iii. p. 1992, fig. 2137 = Reinach, i. 336.

Footnote 798:

  See Pottier, _Lecythes blancs_, p. 99 ff.

Footnote 799:

  See Chapter XI., and Hartwig, _Meisterschalen_, p. 499.

Footnote 800:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1899, p. 147 ff.

Footnote 801:

  See _Ath. Mitth._ 1891, p. 376.

Footnote 802:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1899, p. 154.

Footnote 803:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1899, pl. 4.

Footnote 804:

  _Cat._ 222.

Footnote 805:

  See Durand-Gréville in _Rev. Arch._ xviii. (1891), p. 99 ff., xix.
  (1892), p. 363 ff.

Footnote 806:

  See Blümner, _Technol._ ii. p. 81.

Footnote 807:

  See for the four colours used by him, Plut. _de defect. orac._ 47,
  436 C; Cic. _Brut._ 18, 70; and cf. Pliny, _H.N._ xxxv. 50.

Footnote 808:

  On vases with gilding, see Jahn, _Vasen mit Goldschmuck_ (1865).

Footnote 809:

  Plat. _Theaet._ 147 A, _Rep._ iv. 421 D; Pollux, vii. 163.

Footnote 810:

  Strabo, xv. 717; Pollux, vii. 182.

Footnote 811:

  Schol. _in_ Ar. _Pac._ 1202.

Footnote 812:

  Pollux, vii. 160.

Footnote 813:

  B.M. B 400.

Footnote 814:

  Lucian, _Prom. in Verbis_, 2; cf. Lactantius, _Div. Inst._ ii. 11.

Footnote 815:

  Plutarch, _Apophth. Reg. et Imp._ 176 E.

Footnote 816:

  Cf. _B.M. Cat. of Sculpt._ i. 599; Ross-Meier, _Demen von Attika_, p.
  122, No. 67. The persons here mentioned were not necessarily potters.

Footnote 817:

  Boeckh, _C.I.G._ ii. 3485.

Footnote 818:

  Hes. _Op. et Di._ 25: ?a? ?e?aµe?? ?e?aµe? ??t?e?; quoted by
  Aristotle, _Rhet._ ii. 4, 21, and Plat. _Lys._ 215 C. Euthymides on
  one of his vases places the boast, “Euphronios never did anything
  like this.” See for these two artists, Chapter X.

Footnote 819:

  Cf. the vase at Athens described above (p. 218), and the others with
  representations of potteries.




                                PART II
                     HISTORY OF GREEK VASE-PAINTING




                              CHAPTER VI
                           _PRIMITIVE FABRICS_

    Introductory—Cypriote Bronze-Age pottery—Classification—Mycenaean
      pottery in Cyprus—Graeco-Phoenician fabrics—Shapes and
      decoration—Hellenic and later vases—Primitive pottery in
      Greece—Troy—Thera and Cyclades—Crete—Recent discoveries—Mycenaean
      pottery—Classification and distribution—Centres of
      fabric—Ethnography and chronology.


In the preceding chapters we have given a general _résumé_ of the
subject of Greek pottery; we have discussed the sites on which Greek
vases have been found, the methods employed in their manufacture, the
shapes which they assume, and the uses to which they were put both on
earth and in the tombs; and we have now reached perhaps the most
important part of the subject, at any rate in the eyes of
archaeologists, namely, the history of the rise, development and
decadence of painting on Greek vases.

It has already been noted (in Chapter I.) that this branch of the study
of Greek vases is one that has only been called into existence in
comparatively recent times, and that up to the year 1854 or thereabouts
all attempts at dating the vases (chiefly of course owing to the
poverty of material) were purely empirical and tentative. They were
moreover largely combined with fantastic interpretations of the painted
designs.

During the last forty years, and especially during the last twenty, the
steady growth of archaeological study and increased attention to
excavations have enormously increased both the material at command and
the power of utilising it with scientific method. The extensive finds
of pottery in Greece, Asia Minor, Northern Africa, Italy, and
elsewhere, including more especially products of the earlier periods,
have enabled the students of the subject to trace the sequence of
fabrics from the rude wares of Troy and the Greek Islands up to the
graceful and finished products of the Athenian _ateliers_, and onward
to the overgrown luxuriousness of the gigantic Apulian wares. The
subjects of the paintings, once of all-absorbing, are now only of
subordinate interest, except so far as they illustrate certain phases
of development, and the chief interest of the vases is the question of
their origin, their maker, or their place in relation to others.

It will therefore be the object of this and of the succeeding chapters
to trace with all possible detail, as far as space permits, the history
of Greek vase-manufacture and vase-painting in all their aspects. We
have already indicated (p. 31) the limits within which the subject
falls, and the convenient rough division into four main classes of
which it permits (p. 23). This introductory chapter, therefore, deals
with the primitive fabrics, leading up, through the two following, to
the period of black-figured vases in Chapter IX. The lines of
demarcation are, indeed, difficult if not impossible to draw, but they
must not in any case be taken as rigid ones, being largely
conventional, and only adopted in order to obtain a point of division
for the chapters.

Perhaps the leading feature of the early history of Greek vases is the
gradual coalescence of the numerous local fabrics first into two or
three main streams, and finally into the one great and all-absorbing
current of Athenian art. In the sixth century this was really brought
about more by historical causes than anything else, as a result of the
gradually increasing supremacy of Athens in art and culture from the
time of the Peisistratidae down to that of Perikles.

One region, and one only, pursues its artistic course without regard to
the contemporaneous tendencies prevailing in the Greek world, and that
is the island of =Cyprus=. Here again the causes are largely political,
as we shall see; largely also ethnographical and geographical, from the
character of the inhabitants and the position of the island, a
meeting-place and bone of contention between the great nations of the
Eastern Mediterranean. For this reason we propose to deal first with
the pottery of Cyprus, which has little in common with that of the rest
of Greece, and always retains something of its primitive character,
though it is always as much influenced from Greece on the one hand as
from the East on the other. It is in Cyprus also that we meet with some
of the earliest remains of pottery yet found on Greek soil.

                         § 1. CYPRIOTE POTTERY

                              BIBLIOGRAPHY

    Cesnola, _Cyprus_; O.-Richter, _Kypros, the Bible, and Homer_;
      Perrot and Chipiez, _Hist. de l’Art_, iii. p. 648 ff.; _Cyprus
      Mus. Cat._ (Myres and O.-Richter); _B.M. Excavations in Cyprus_
      (Turner Bequest), 1894–6; Dümmler in _Ath. Mitth._ xi. (1886), p.
      209 ff.; _Archaeologia_, xlv. p. 127 ff.; Pottier, _Cat. des
      Vases ant. du Louvre_, i. p. 82 ff., and other references there
      given.


In order to understand aright the history of Cypriote art, it is indeed
necessary to know something of its ethnography and political history,
and the various influences to which it has been subjected. But space
forbids us to do more than make very brief allusions to the more
important of these features. Speaking generally, Cyprus may be regarded
as a centre wherein have met all the currents of ancient civilisation,
forming an amalgamation of artistic elements. Thus Cypriote art, though
it loses in originality, gains in interest; and yet though often
slavishly imitative, it has at bottom great individuality, more
especially in its pottery. Hence it will be seen that it is essentially
necessary to consider the pottery of Cyprus as a thing apart.

As regards chronology, except for a certain determinable sequence of
artistic phases, even more caution than in dealing with Hellenic art is
required. The remarkable conservatism and persistence of types
exhibited by Cypriote art has more than once proved a pitfall, and has
given rise to considerable controversy at one time or another. Dates
can only be used in the vaguest manner.

The pottery of Cyprus falls under three headings, which for
convenience, though not perhaps with the strictest accuracy, are
usually defined as follows:—

  1. _Bronze Age_, from about 2500 B.C. to 800 B.C.

  2. _Graeco-Phoenician period_, from 800 B.C. to 400 B.C., overlapping
      with

  3. _Hellenic period_, from 550 B.C. to 200 B.C., representing the
      time during which imported Greek vases are found in the tombs,
      native pottery gradually dying out except in the form of plain
      vessels.

The pottery of the Bronze-Age period again falls into two distinct
periods: (1) Copper Age or pre-Mycenaean period (2500–1500 B.C.),
during which few bronze implements are found in the tombs, and all the
pottery is purely indigenous, the work of the original inhabitants of
the island, without any admixture of importations. (2) The Mycenaean
period (1500–800 B.C.), during which the local pottery (including both
unpainted and painted vases) is reinforced by large quantities of
imported Mycenaean pottery, together with elaborately decorated vases
of Mycenaean technique, either made locally or specially made for
Cyprus and imported.

The sites on which Bronze-Age remains are found (see above, p. 66) are
chiefly confined to the central and southern parts of the island, the
most important sites being near the modern towns of Nicosia, Larnaka,
and Famagusta. The discovery in these tombs of such objects as
milking-bowls and querns is an additional proof of the conclusion
naturally to be drawn—that the early inhabitants of Cyprus were a race
of pastoral lowlanders.[820] The tombs (see p. 35) are mostly pit-tombs
of moderate depth, recalling in type the Egyptian _mastaba_, and burial
is universal.

There is no doubt that the art of pottery was introduced into Cyprus
coincidently with the beginning of the Copper Age, which may be placed
at about the year 2000 B.C. Although no bronze is found in the earliest
tombs, on the other hand stone implements are absent, and the types of
the pottery are identical with those of the later Bronze Age. It will
be seen that it presents throughout very striking parallels with the
pottery of Hissarlik, which will form the subject of the next section.
The forms are largely similar and the technique is the same, but the
Hissarlik pottery is ruder and of inferior clay. Stone implements are
found at Hissarlik, but no copper, from which the inference may be
drawn that that metal, being indigenous to Cyprus, supplanted stone
there at an earlier date than in the Troad, whither it had to find its
way by means of commerce. It was no doubt largely due to the existence
of its copper ores that Cyprus so early shows an advance in its
civilisation.

The shapes of the earliest Cypriote pottery are purely indigenous and
very characteristic, but the technique may very likely have been
learned from elsewhere; in regard to which it should be noted that as
it is invariably hand-made, an Egyptian origin is altogether precluded,
owing to the early use of the wheel for pottery in that country (see
pp. 7, 206). For the most part the forms are characterised by a
tendency to fantastic and unsymmetrical modelling, with a preference
for complicated forms, such as two or three vases joined together.
Others again imitate gourds or vessels of straw and basket-work, such
as are used in Cyprus at the present day. They have no foot or
“base-ring” to stand upon; and another characteristic is the frequent
absence of handles, the place of which is supplied by small ears, by
means of which the vase was hung up or carried by cords.[821] Sometimes
these ears cover the whole outline of the vase. The plastic principle
is always popular in the Bronze-Age pottery, and manifests itself in
more than one direction. From the first it is exhibited in the
tendency, so common in early art, to combine the vase and the
statuette,[822] a tendency which is even stronger in the pottery of
Hissarlik. It also takes the form of designs in relief covering the
surface of, or moulded to, the vase.

In one point Cyprus is manifestly in advance of the rest of the ancient
world, and that is, in the decoration of the pottery. Here, in fact, we
meet with the first attempts at painted vases, combined with the
employment of a fine bright red or polished black slip to cover the
surface. In the earlier varieties the designs, when they occur, are
confined to simple rectilinear geometrical patterns incised through the
slip before baking; but these are soon supplemented by the employment,
first of a matt-white pigment, secondly of a brown-black paint obtained
from the native umber. The only other locality in which painted vases
occur at so early a period is the island of Thera (see below, p. 260).

We pass now to the consideration of the later Bronze-Age
pottery—namely, that which is found in tombs together with vases of
Mycenaean style. In this we see various modifications of the indigenous
art, and witness its eventual transformation by the introduction of new
processes and ideas from various sources. The main streams of influence
are three in number, coming from the east, south, and west
respectively. Of these the first represents the Asiatic civilisations
of Babylonia and the Hittites, to whom in the first place are due the
engraved cylinders frequently found in these tombs, and at a
comparatively late date such objects as the ivory draught-box from
Enkomi in the British Museum, which affords points of comparison with
the reliefs of Kouyounjik. Egyptian influences date from the invasion
of Cyprus by Thothmes III. (eighteenth dynasty), about 1450 B.C., as
exemplified by the frequent occurrence of scarabs and porcelain
objects. A counter-influence of Cyprus on Egypt is seen in the presence
of exported Cypriote pottery in tombs at Kahun, Saqqara, and
elsewhere.[823] Lastly, there is the far more extensive influence of
the Mycenaean civilisation, covering several hundred years, and
eventually absorbing the indigenous fabrics until the foundations of a
new phase of decorative art were laid on a combination of the two. The
Mycenaean vases belong to the later styles exclusively (see below, p.
271), and show a strong preference for certain forms such as the
false-necked amphora and the large richly-decorated krater peculiar to
Cyprus; but these we must discuss later in fuller detail. Briefly, they
represent the first entry of Greece proper into the Cypriote world.

The ethnological affinities of the early inhabitants of Cyprus cannot
be positively ascertained. In M. Heuzey’s opinion they were Asiatics,
Syrian rather than Phoenician, and he suggests that the names of Kition
(Chittim) and Amathus (Hamath) imply Hittite and Hamathite colonists.
Dümmler regarded them as closely akin to the race which inhabited the
second city at Hissarlik,[824] an idea to which the similarity of the
pottery might be thought to lend support. At all events in Greek legend
this people was personified by the mythical king Kinyras, the father of
Adonis, who came from the neighbouring Asiatic coast. The Hellenic, or
rather Achaean, invasion is crystallised into the legends of Teucer’s
colonisation of Salamis after the fall of Troy,[825] of an Arcadian
settlement at Kerynia and elsewhere, and of the founding of Curium by
Argives (? Mycenaeans).[826]

The first attempt to classify the pottery of Cyprus, and to distinguish
between the Bronze-Age wares and what are now known as the
Graeco-Phoenician fabrics, was made by the late Mr. T. B. Sandwith in
1876.[827] Considering the comparative poverty of material at his
command, and the state of archaeological knowledge at the time, his
brief but illuminating monograph is a wonderfully accurate and
scientific contribution, and, so far as it goes, his classification can
still be accepted in the main. But the extensive series of excavations
in the island since the British occupation, and the investigation of
such fruitful sites as Salamis, Curium, and Kition, have resulted in a
great advance of our knowledge of the subject. The elaborate
classification made by Messrs. Myres and Ohnefalsch-Richter of the
representative collections of the Cyprus Museum must for the present be
regarded as final, and of necessity forms the basis of the succeeding
description.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The pottery of the Bronze Age may be classified under two main
headings: Painted and Unpainted Pottery. Of these the former is
practically confined to the later tombs, and we naturally turn first to
the unpainted pottery as taking precedence in chronology and
development.

Almost the commonest, and probably the earliest, variety is the =red
polished ware=, sometimes plain, but generally ornamented with incised
patterns or reliefs (see Plate XI., Nos. 3, 4, 7).[828] The polished
surface, which seems to betoken a great advance in technique, was
doubtless produced by means of a burnisher. In some varieties the
surface is black, a result due to the action of smoke in firing. The
commonest forms are a globular bottle with long neck and handle, a
plain bowl, a cooking-pot on feet, and a two-handled globular amphora;
besides composite and abnormal forms. None of these vases have any kind
of base except the cooking-pots.

The incised patterns, when they occur, are scratched in deeply before
firing, and often filled in with white; the patterns, which tend to
become more and more elaborate, consist of zigzags, wavy lines,
chequers and lozenges, network patterns, and concentric circles.
Ornament in relief is applied in the form of strips of clay, often
worked into the shape of rude figures of trees, snakes, animals, or
simple patterns. Many tombs and even cemeteries, as at Alambra, Agia
Paraskevi, and elsewhere, contain no other form of pottery; but though
these are undoubtedly earlier than the mixed tombs, the red ware in a
degenerate form continues long afterwards.

There is also a small class of =black-slip ware=, covered with a thin
dark lustreless slip which flakes off easily. The ornamentation, which
is seldom absent, is generally in the form of a straight or wavy line
with a row of dots alternately on either side, either incised or in
relief. The forms are much the same as in the red ware, but often seem
to suggest metal or leather prototypes.

An interesting class is formed by the =black punctured ware=, in which
the clay is black throughout, without a slip, but partly polished. Most
of these vases are small jugs with a narrow neck, swelling body, and
small foot, and they are ornamented with punctured dots, usually in
triangular patches, but sometimes irregularly distributed. In Cyprus
they are mostly found in the early necropolis at Kalopsida, but they
also occur in the late Mycenaean tombs at Enkomi. The special interest
of this ware is that it is found in Egypt, under such circumstances
that it can fairly be dated; notably at Khata'anah in conjunction with
scarabs and flint chips of the twelfth and thirteenth dynasties
(2500–2000 B.C.). It is also found in the Fayûm, where Prof. Petrie
obtained some good specimens.[829]

Allied to this is the Cypriote _bucchero_ ware, of plain black clay
without slip, ornamented with ribs or flutings. It is only found in the
later tombs, and can be traced through the subsequent transitional
period.[830]

Of the remaining fabrics the most conspicuous is that termed by Mr.
Myres the =base-ring ware=, which is marked off from other Bronze-Age
types by its flat-ringed base in all cases. The clay is dark and of
fine texture, with thinly-glazed surface. The ornament is either in
relief or painted in matt-white, the patterns being exclusively of a
basket or network type (Plate XI., figs. 1, 2). The reliefs, when they
occur, consist of scrolls or raised seams curving over the body,
obviously in imitation of the seams of a leather bottle; they sometimes
end in a leaf-ornament,[831] and at other times take the form of a
snake. This fabric is very commonly found in the later tombs with
Mycenaean vases, and hardly earlier. It has been found in Egypt and at
Lachish.[832]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                                PLATE XI

[Illustration:

  EARLY CYPRIOTE POTTERY (BRITISH MUSEUM).
  1, 2, “BASE-RING” BLACK WARE; 3, 4, 7, INCISED RED AND BLACK WARES;
    5, 6, “WHITE-SLIP” WARES.
]

                  ------------------------------------

Among the rarer varieties of unpainted wares Mr. Myres includes white
base-ring ware (plates and bowls), imitations of straw-plait or
wicker-work, and plain _wheel-made wares_ with red or black slip, of
peculiar form.[833]

Among the Painted Pottery by far the most widely-spread local fabric is
that styled by Mr. Myres the =white-slip ware=, which appears in the
tombs of the later Bronze Age, and is more than any other associated
with Mycenaean vases. In cemeteries such as Enkomi, Curium, and
Maroni[834] it has been found in large quantities in almost every tomb,
and its range is not limited to Cyprus. The characteristics of this
ware are a black gritty clay, worked very thin, and a thick white
creamy slip with which it is covered both inside and out; it is
exceedingly brittle, and perfect specimens are comparatively uncommon.
The ornament is laid on in a black pigment, often turning to red by the
action of fire; the most common form is that of a hemispherical bowl
with a flat triangular handle, notched at the apex. Almost the only
other forms are a long-necked flask or bottle of the lekythos type and
a large jug with cylindrical body (like an _olpe_) and a flat
thumb-piece above the handle.

Mr. Myres[835] points out that the scheme of decoration seems intended
to imitate the binding and seams of a leather bowl; it usually consists
of a band of various patterns (lattice-work, zigzags, lozenges, or
lines of dots) round the rim, from which similar bands descend
vertically, but do not meet at the bottom. Similarly the handle seems
intended to represent two pieces of flexible wood bound together. In
the case of the jugs the patterns follow a similar principle, giving
the effect of a decoration in panels to the upper part. Specimens of
this ware are given in Plate XI., Nos. 5, 6.

Beyond the confines of Cyprus isolated specimens of this ware have been
found at Athens, Hissarlik, Thera, Lachish in Palestine, and at Saqqara
and Tell-el-Amarna in Egypt, in the last-named instance along with
Mycenaean vases.[836] The resemblance of some white-slip wares to the
Dipylon vases is not a little curious.[837] But it can hardly be
thought that the one influenced the other.

The other local painted wares are by no means so common. They are, in
fact, almost limited to specimens of an unpolished _white ware_, with
fine cream-coloured clay, on which patterns such as groups of straight
or wavy lines, chevrons, chequers, and triangles filled with hatched
lines are painted with a pigment varying from dull black to dull red.
The commonest forms are one-handled bowls and small bottles, either
globular or sausage-shaped. The latter are distinguished by often
having long tube-like spouts attached and by the numerous perforated
projections for the attachment of strings, handles being generally
absent at first, but when they are introduced the projections remain as
an ornamental survival. In a few isolated specimens the surface is
covered with a polished slip. Others again are covered with a _black
glaze_,[838] on which are painted in dull red groups of short parallel
lines, which (as Mr. Myres points out) seem to have been executed at a
single stroke with a cluster of brushes.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The =Mycenaean pottery= which has been found on not a few sites in
Cyprus, and of late years in such surprising quantities at Enkomi and
in the neighbourhood of Larnaka and Limassol (Maroni, Curium, etc.),
belongs properly to another section of this chapter, and would not call
for discussion in this connection, but for the fact that in Cyprus it
presents certain features which seem to be almost exclusively local. At
all events it is advisable to consider how far Mycenaean pottery in
Cyprus differs from that found in Rhodes, Crete, or Mycenae.

Two points claim our attention in the first instance: (1) that in point
of technique the Cypriote finds fall absolutely into line with those in
other parts of the Mycenaean world; (2) that the range of subjects
depicted on the vases found in Cyprus is wider and in a measure more
developed than elsewhere. To what extent we may be permitted, bearing
both facts in mind, to predicate a local fabric of Mycenaean pottery in
Cyprus, must for the present remain an open question; at the same time
it seems extremely probable that the larger vases, which it will be
necessary to discuss in detail, are, if not of local manufacture, at
all events a fabric made specially for exportation to Cyprus, as we
shall see was the case with a later variety of black-figured Attic ware.

The peculiarity of the Cypriote-Mycenaean pottery is that whereas on
other sites the decoration is confined to linear ornaments, and animal
or vegetable subjects drawn almost exclusively from the aquatic world
(such as cuttle-fish, shell-fish, or seaweed), in Cyprus we find
represented not only animals, such as bulls, deer, goats, and dogs, but
even human figures, both male and female, and monsters such as Sphinxes
and Gryphons. Having regard to what M. Pottier[839] calls the law of
the _hierarchie des genres_, it does not seem impossible that this may
imply a _late survival_ of Mycenaean art in Cyprus, and although this
view has been hitherto strongly contested in certain quarters, it finds
support from other evidence obtained in recent excavations. The whole
chronology of Cypriote pottery is still in a very unsettled state, and
until it can be definitely shown that the Cypriote Geometrical style
began concurrently with the appearance of Geometrical pottery in
Greece, it is still admissible to urge that Mycenaean art prevailed
here for some time subsequent to its disappearance from the greater
part of the Hellenic world. For this the accepted date is the end of
the tenth century B.C., but it is not necessary to extend its influence
in Cyprus more than two centuries longer, _i.e._ beyond the eighth
century, at the latest.

If we accept the view generally held that the Mycenaean civilisation
was Achaean, and that after the Dorian invasion its representatives
were driven in an easterly direction and settled on the coast of Asia
Minor; and if again we regard this as an historical version of the
Greek traditions of the Trojan war and the subsequent migrations of the
Achaean heroes[840]; we may then consider that the stories of Teucer’s
foundation of a new Salamis and of an Argive colonisation of Curium
find their verification in the Mycenaean settlements recently
discovered on those two Cypriote sites. The extent and richness of the
old Salamis at Enkomi at any rate seems to suggest that it may have
flourished as a Mycenaean settlement for some centuries.

But to return to the pottery. Two forms are eminently characteristic of
the Cypriote varieties. Of these, one—the “false amphora” (p. 271)—is
not peculiar to the island, but is found wherever Mycenaean pottery has
penetrated; though especially common in Cyprus, it is in fact the most
popular of all Mycenaean shapes. The other is a large krater, found in
two varieties, either a straight-sided deep bowl with wide mouth and no
neck, or a spheroidal vessel on a high stem, with a low straight neck
of less diameter than the body. It is this latter class which appears
to be of local manufacture and presents such a variety of painted
decoration.

Up to the year 1895 only some half-dozen of these kraters were known,
one of which was found by General Cesnola in the rich necropolis at
Agia Paraskevi near Nicosia[841]; another he alleged to have come from
Amathus, but it was no doubt found at Maroni, not so far distant, where
for many years a Bronze-Age cemetery has been known. In the above-named
year two more came to light at Curium,[842] one of the same type as
General Cesnola’s, with figures driving two-horse chariots; the other
having in addition the unique subject of a series of women, each figure
in a separate panel, represented as waving their arms or holding
flowers.[843] These were speedily followed by the rich and valuable
series from Enkomi now in the British Museum, since which time other
interesting specimens have been obtained for the Museum in various
excavations or have found their way into the hands of local collectors
(see Plate XII.).

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                               PLATE XII

[Illustration: MYCENAEAN VASES FROM CYPRUS (BRITISH MUSEUM).]

                  ------------------------------------

Native imitations of the Mycenaean vases, which have been described as
“sub-Mycenaean wares,” have been found in considerable numbers on most
of the sites where the genuine Mycenaean ware exists. They fall
technically under the heading of painted white ware (p. 251),[844] the
difference being that the decoration is in _matt_ colour (varying from
black to red) on an unpolished drab ground. The patterns mostly follow
Mycenaean models, but some are new. They are well represented on the
Mycenaean site at Curium,[845] especially in one or two tombs of
transitional character, and in some cases the decoration is of a
distinctly Geometrical type, illustrating the development of the
succeeding style. In any case it is not difficult to distinguish them
from the genuine Mycenaean fabrics.

                  *       *       *       *       *

In these so-called sub-Mycenaean vases we can trace the best evidence
of the transition from the Bronze Age to the succeeding or
Graeco-Phoenician period. But on the whole the line of demarcation is
clearly defined, as for instance by the forms and position of the
tombs, which become larger and lie deeper; by the appearance of iron
implements and bronze fibulae; and by the fact that all the native
pottery is now made on the wheel. Relations with continental Greece are
evidenced by the occasional importation of Geometrical pottery of the
Dipylon type (as in the great vase found at Curium), dating from the
ninth and eighth centuries B.C. As we have already seen, the first
Hellenic settlements in Cyprus seem to have followed on more or less
immediately after the Dorian invasion, in the sites of Salamis, Curium,
Kerynia, Paphos, and others which afterwards became the capitals of
small Hellenic kingdoms.

On the other hand, the Phoenician thalassocracy, which began about the
ninth century B.C., never had much foothold in Cyprus, less at any rate
than was formerly supposed. Politically at all events the Phoenician
influence was comparatively small, even in their settlements at Kition
and Amathus[846]; we read of expeditions of the kings of Tyre in the
tenth and eighth centuries, the object of which was to force the former
town to pay tribute; but subsequently they were compelled by the
Assyrian domination under Sargon to retreat westwards. In the seventh
century a new power arose in the shape of Egypt, and in the sixth
Cyprus became a tributary of Amasis.[847] Throughout, however,
relations with Greece were maintained, and we read that in 501 B.C. the
Cypriote princes joined the Ionians in their revolt against Persia, a
fact which shows the strength of the Hellenic element.

Nevertheless the term “Graeco-Phoenician,” which has been adopted to
describe the art of this period, is convenient, and can hardly be
improved upon, if we bear in mind that the term “Phoenician” really
represents the combination of Egyptian and Assyrian elements of art
which filtered through that race into Cyprus, and in which sometimes
the one, sometimes the other has the predominance. This is seen perhaps
more clearly in the sculpture, metal-work, and terracottas, as for
instance in the incised bronze and silver bowls,[848] than in the
pottery. Painted pottery was never a feature of Oriental art, and the
Phoenician influence in the pottery is confined to borrowed motives of
Oriental character, like foreign words in a language. Another proof
that Cyprus resisted the Phoenician domination is afforded by the
curious fact that though the Greeks of the mainland adopted the
Phoenician alphabet entirely, in Cyprus, on the other hand—where, above
all, we should have expected to find it—its place is taken by a
syllabary, the forms of which appear to bear some relation to the
Lycian, Carian, and Pamphylian alphabets. That this syllabary, which is
universally employed for inscriptions down to the fourth century, is of
a very high antiquity is shown by its close affinities with the
newly-discovered Cretan script, and by the fact that single characters
of a similar type are often found engraved on the handles of Mycenaean
vases in Cyprus. Each character represents a syllable, not a letter
(except in the case of vowels), and the dialect is thought to be
largely influenced by Aeolic.

Mycenaean influence, as might be expected, was slow to die out in
Cyprus, and the pottery is no exception. It is seen not only in the
patterns, such as the concentric circles—an invention of the
Cypriote-Mycenaean pottery, which forms a favourite and almost
universal motive at a later date—but in the subjects and technique. The
practice of painting figures in outline, not in silhouette, as in the
birds and beasts of the Enkomi kraters, the use of dull red and black
pigments on an unglazed light-coloured surface, and many other details
are an heritage from the Bronze Age, extending over many a succeeding
century. With these are combined the influences of the early Attic
pottery,[849] in the panels of Geometrical patterns, and the later
rosette and conventionalised lotos-flower, which, with the concentric
circles, form the stock-in-trade of the “Graeco-Phoenician” potter. The
British Museum collection includes one or two remarkable isolated
specimens which illustrate this principle. It is for instance
instructive to compare the Sphinxes on a krater from Enkomi[850] with
those on a large amphora lately acquired from the Karpas,[851] or the
oinochoe from General Cesnola’s collection with a chariot-scene (Plate
XIII.),[852] with those from Mycenaean sites similarly decorated. On
the other hand, the extraordinary large vase from Tamassos,[853] with
its crudely and childishly drawn figures, combines a curious admixture
of Greek and Oriental motives, and early as it must be, is not
Mycenaean in conception or technique.

Oriental influence is not, however, altogether wanting in the pottery.
The lotos-flowers and rosettes, of which we have already spoken, are
derived respectively from Egypt and Assyria, and the conventionalised
palm-trees, which also appear, are of course purely Oriental. So too,
again, the typically Oriental subject of the sacred tree between two
animals appears in various forms. But here again we are met with the
surprising fact that the Oriental element is far stronger in Greece
than in Cyprus, as will be seen later in the account of the early
Hellenic fabrics; and no doubt it is due to this cause that the
Geometric style was not driven out from Cyprus as it was from Greece,
but continued for many centuries.

In attempting a detailed description of the Graeco-Phoenician pottery,
it will be seen that any chronological system is impossible. The
conservative tendency of Cypriote art caused the same methods of
decoration to be employed with extraordinary persistency during a
period of time which saw the whole development of Hellenic
vase-painting from its earliest beginnings to its decline, and though
there is a certain amount of variety, there is no development properly
speaking, and the latest fabrics are, artistically speaking, on the
same level as the earliest. It might be thought that the evidence of
excavations would compensate for this absence of artistic criteria; but
such is not the case. As a general rule in tombs containing imported
Greek vases, the dates of which can be fixed within reasonable limits,
native pottery is conspicuous by its absence, as may be seen from the
results obtained at Curium. In any case, in the tombs richest in
Hellenic pottery, as at Poli, the local wares are largely of a
definitely late character, and so far distinct from the Geometrical and
Orientalising fabrics as to form a class by themselves. Another
difficulty which has to be taken into account, is that caused by the
frequency of re-burials in Cypriote tombs. Of this there were countless
instances at Amathus and Poli, so much so that explorers of the latter
site were actually led to believe that the Geometrical pottery was
contemporaneous with remains of the Hellenistic age with which it was
frequently found.[854] But where trustworthy evidence can be obtained,
it entirely militates against this possibility.

The principal sites[855] on which “Graeco-Phoenician” pottery has been
found are: Amathus, Curium, Dali (Idalion), Kition, Lapathos, Poli
(Marion-Arsinoe), Paphos, Salamis, Soli, and Tamassos. Other sites are
not at present identified, but the finds were made in the neighbourhood
of the modern Achna, Ormidhia, and other villages, and in the Karpas.
Of these sites the richest are Amathus, Dali, Curium, and Poli; but in
the finest collection of vases of this class, that of General Cesnola
at New York, the alleged sites are not always to be accepted with
certainty.

[Illustration: FIG. 75. JUG WITH CONCENTRIC CIRCLES: GRAECO-PHOENICIAN
PERIOD (BRITISH MUSEUM).]

Graeco-Phoenician pottery is, as has been said, exclusively wheel-made,
and almost always supplied with a “base-ring.” Reliefs and incised
ornaments are never found, but instances of moulded wares, combining
the vase with the statuette, are not wanting, especially among the
later varieties. The designs are usually painted in a non-lustrous
black pigment, varied with the use of opaque purple and white,
corresponding to the pigments employed by Hellenic potters. The ground
is either white, without any polish or slip—as in the painted white
ware of the Bronze Age and sub-Mycenaean fabrics—or else covered with a
more or less lustrous red slip, varying from a bright orange or deep
red to a dark brown (the latter usually with unpolished surface).
Purple is employed only on the white wares, white only on the red. The
typical decoration of the white wares consists of lotos-patterns,
tree-ornaments, and water-fowl. Generally speaking, these are earlier
than the red. On the lustrous red wares the decoration is usually
confined to simple patterns of concentric circles, vertical and
horizontal, maeander crosses, lozenges and triangles. Fig. 75, from
Curium, is a typical specimen of the more elaborate types, and another
is shown in Plate XIII.

The forms are at first very varied, but gradually crystallise into some
half-dozen main types: dishes, bowls on stems, lekythi with one or two
handles, jugs with globular bodies, and large amphorae with vertical
side-handles. Of these the jug is by far the commonest. Among the
peculiar forms in the earlier tombs (eighth to sixth centuries) may be
mentioned _aski_ in the form of birds or oxen (the latter a Mycenaean
survival), and a kind of flask with barrel-shaped body, on which the
decoration of concentric circles, etc., does not follow the usual
horizontal system of classical pottery, but is disposed vertically, in
contradiction to all artistic feeling (see Plate XIII.). The circles
are often very fine and close, and were produced by holding a brush
full of paint close to the surface of the vase as it was turned on the
wheel. The drawing of the circles in different planes, without regard
to the lines of the vase, was easily effected by placing it in
different positions. In the period of Hellenic importations the
principal form is the jug with ovoid body and modelled spout, and flat
dishes are also common.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Unpainted pottery is almost as common as painted in the
Graeco-Phoenician period, and calls for a few words of separate
treatment. For the most part it comes under the heading of Domestic
Ware, or earthenware vessels similar to those in ordinary use at the
present day. They are made of plain, unrefined, usually reddish, clay,
without any slip or polish, and include various forms of jugs, bowls,
and plates, as well as the large wine-amphorae with pointed bases
universally found at all periods. Many lamps and small “cup-and-saucer”
double bowls occur in this category. In the earlier tombs of the
Transitional period, pottery of a black-slip ware, with reeded body, is
frequently found, chiefly in the form of jugs and kraters. Plain black
wares, like the Italian _bucchero_, are also rarely found; as are
vessels covered with a fine red slip and polished.

                  *       *       *       *       *

In most of the painted pottery of the Graeco-Phoenician period,
especially in its earlier phases, the technical methods are those which
we have already described in speaking not only of the “sub-Mycenaean”
or Transitional fabrics, but also of the painted white ware of the
Bronze-Age tombs. That is to say, that the decoration is in dull colour
on a lustreless and (usually) unpolished white or drab ground. The
colour, however, is usually not red, as in the earlier stages, but
black, red being used chiefly as an accessory or for picked-out
details. The latter varies from a pale brick-red to deep purple. The
system of decoration is often extremely elaborate, although the range
of subjects is limited. Apart from geometrical or conventional
patterns, such as the stylised palmette, lotos-flower, stars, or trees,
we only find water-fowl, fish, a few quadrupeds such as bulls or
deer,[856] and finally human figures. But the last are exceedingly
rare, and confined to the white wares, the best example being perhaps
the very Oriental design of two warriors driving in a chariot,[857] or
the worshippers rendering homage to seated deities on the fine vase
from Ormidhia (Fig. 76).[858]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                              PLATE XIII

[Illustration: CYPRIOTE POTTERY: GRAECO-PHOENICIAN PERIOD (BRITISH
MUSEUM).]

                  ------------------------------------

The system of geometrical decoration on some of the earlier vases,
especially the large jars, is often extremely elaborate, covering every
available inch of the surface[859]; the patterns consist of rosettes,
panels of lozenge-pattern or chequers, triangles of hatched lines,
dotted circles, etc., all combined in parallel bands or friezes, much
in the same way as on the Dipylon wares. The disappearance of this
elaborate style, together with human figures and figures of animals, is
perhaps to be accounted for by the importations of Hellenic wares which
began in the sixth century, and relegated the local fabrics to a
subordinate position, just as in Greece the early Geometrical fabrics
were obscured by the Mycenaean pottery (see below, p. 279).

Some interesting specimens, forming a late survival of these earlier
Geometrical wares, were found at Amathus in 1894.[860] They include one
which has a parallel in a vase found at Phocaea by Prof. Ramsay,[861]
and originally thought to be Ionic in origin; the decoration consists
of a head of Hathor the Egyptian goddess in a panel, with debased
geometrical patterns. There can be no doubt now that the fabric is
Cypriote, probably of the fifth century, and not without traces of
Ionic influence. Another shows a remarkable development in the
direction of naturalism, and the subject is unique in Cypriote pottery:
men banqueting under a palm-tree.

[Illustration:

  From _Baumeister_.
  FIG. 76. CYPRIOTE VASE FROM ORMIDHIA.
]

These probably date from the fifth century, the period which seems to
be represented by the later Geometrical red wares with concentric
circles, now slowly dying out under the influence of Hellenic
importations, and exceedingly rare in tombs where Greek vases are
found. At the same time a great transformation comes over the contents
of the tombs, which themselves begin to increase in size, with a
shorter d??µ??, to which a flight of steps leads down. Other tombs—and
this is often the case where Greek importations are found, as at
Curium—are merely in the form of ramifying passages cut in the earth,
without any structural remains. Sixth century and earlier Greek
fabrics, such as the Geometrical, Corinthian, or Ionian wares, are very
rare; but the imported Dipylon vase found by General Cesnola at
Curium[862] is a notable instance. Black-figured vases when found are
almost invariably of a late and careless type, characteristic of the
last efforts of that style in the fifth century. There is, however, a
remarkable exception in the case of a small class of jugs, which are in
shape an exact imitation of the globular Cypriote jugs with
concentric-circle decoration[863]; the long narrow neck and trefoil
mouth, with its incised eyes, are retained, but the decoration is
purely Attic, in the style of B.F. vases of 520–500 B.C. These are
found at Poli and Amathus, and appear to have been made specially at
Athens for importation to Cyprus. Poli (Marion) was for some reason a
great centre for Athenian imports in general, and has yielded many fine
specimens of Hellenic pottery (see p. 67). Red-figured vases signed by
Chachrylion, Hermaios, etc., have been found here,[864] and at Curium a
fine R.F. krater with the name of Megakles (?a???)[865]; also some fine
white-ground specimens at Poli.[866]

By the fourth century, if not earlier, the Geometrical and Hellenic
vases are almost entirely replaced by a new class of wares, which may
be termed “Graeco-Cypriote,” in contradistinction to the
Graeco-Phoenician. The same red clay, covered with a more or less
polished red slip, still obtains, but the painted decoration is
confined to olive-wreaths in brown or plain bands of colour. We also
witness the revival of an old practice, in a partial return to the
taste for plastic decoration on vases. In many of the fourth-century
tombs are found large pitchers, with a spout modelled in the form of a
woman holding a jug, out of which the liquid was intended to pour
(Plate XIII.).[867] These are sometimes richly decorated in polychrome,
red, blue, green, black, pink, and white; but the colouring is apt to
flake off and disappear. The imported wares of the fourth century are
confined to plain cups and bowls of glazed black ware with stamped
patterns, such as are often found in Greece and Italy. In the
Hellenistic period (300–146 B.C.) painted vases are practically
unknown, though a few rare specimens have turned up at Curium[868]; and
it is not long before they are entirely replaced by the glass vessels
and common wine-amphorae of the large and elaborate Roman tombs.


                    § 2. PRIMITIVE POTTERY IN GREECE

                              BIBLIOGRAPHY

    TROY: Schliemann, _Ilios_; Dörpfeld, _Troja 1893_, and _Troja und
      Ilion_ (1902), i. p. 243 ff.; Dumont-Pottier, _Céramiques_, i. p.
      3 ff.; Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ i. p. 74 ff.

      THERA: Fouqué, _Santorin_; Dumont-Pottier, _Céramiques_, i. p. 19
      ff.; Perrot, _Hist. de l’Art_, vi. p. 135 ff.; Furtwaengler and
      Loeschcke, _Myken. Vasen_, p. 18; Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ i. p.
      119 ff.; Hiller von Gaertringen, _Thera_, vol. ii. (1903), p. 127
      ff.; _Ath. Mitth._ xxviii. (1903), p. 1 ff.

      MELOS: Excavations of British School at Phylakopi (_J.H.S._
      Suppl. Vol. iv. 1904). See also Dümmler in _Ath. Mitth._ xi.
      (1886), p. 15 ff.

The earliest remains of pottery on Hellenic soil are to be sought
chiefly in the Cyclades and on the site of ancient Troy. We have
already had occasion to allude to the latter in speaking of the
earliest Cypriote fabrics, and it is therefore fitting that we should
now give it our first attention.

The site of =Troy=, now known as Hissarlik, was, as is well known,
first explored by Dr. Schliemann in his laudable endeavours to prove
the truth of the early Greek legends of the Trojan War. Although
doubtless there are visible links between the Homeric poems and the
discoveries at Hissarlik, and although it is not necessary to deny all
credence to the historical truth of the “Bible of the Greeks,” yet it
is now generally recognised that Dr. Schliemann’s pardonable enthusiasm
sometimes led him to hasty conclusions. For instance, Dr. Dörpfeld in
his more recent investigations proved that if any remains are to be
connected with the tale of Troy, it is those of the sixth, not of the
second or burnt city.[869] Nine layers in all have been traced, of
which the five lowest may be termed prehistoric, the third, fourth, and
fifth being mere villages on the ruins of the first two. In the lowest
and earliest of all, which may be roughly dated 3000–2500 B.C., flint
implements were found, together with rude black pottery: hand-made
utensils baked in the open, with rings for suspension in place of
handles.

The second city belongs to the period 2500–2000 B.C., and it is this
which has yielded pottery analogous to the earliest examples from
Cyprus (p. 238). It is of the same rough hand-polished black ware, with
decoration either of a plastic character or engraved in the clay while
wet and filled in with white paint. Apart from this there are no traces
of painted decoration, or of any slip; but the colour of the surface
varies with the firing. The patterns consist of zigzags, circles, and
other rudimentary geometrical ornaments. A few wheel-made specimens
were found, but the majority are made by hand. What artistic sense was
evinced by these primitive potters was shown exclusively in the forms,
and in the tendency which is especially conspicuous in primitive times,
though it lingered on through the history of Greek art, and again broke
out in the period of the decadence, to combine the ceramic and the
plastic idea, and to give to the vase the rude resemblance of the human
form.[870] That this was no far-fetched idea is shown by the universal
nomenclature which permits us to speak of the mouth, neck, shoulder,
body, and foot of a vase—a principle which has been extended by general
consent to countless inanimate objects. Thus we find the Hissarlik
potter incising eyes on the upper part of the vase, or affixing lumps
of clay to give a rude suggestion of ears, nose or breasts, or bands to
denote necklaces. The handles often seem intended for rudimentary arms,
and we are tempted to see in the hat-shaped covers of the vases the
idea of a head-covering. Schliemann even went so far as to regard them
as actual idols, and was led by the superficial resemblance of some to
the form of an owl into identifying them with figures of the “owl-eyed”
(??a???p??) Pallas Athena (cf. Fig. 77). But this interpretation has
not found favour for many reasons, and the accidental combination of
forms is obviously only an artistic phase. There are also many similar
shapes, such as plain jars and jugs, and deep funnel-shaped cups with
two graceful handles.

[Illustration: FIG. 77. “OWL-VASE” FROM TROY.]

M. Dumont[871] classifies the fabrics as follows: (1) ordinary vessels,
plates, etc.; (2) large jars or amphorae; (3) primitive kraters, deep
cups, etc.; (4) spherical vases with base-ring [?] and long neck[872];
(5) long two-handled cups; (6) vases reproducing the human form; (7)
vases in the form of pigs and other animals; (8) exceptional forms,
such as double vases; (9) vases with incised patterns, on one of which
a Sphinx is engraved. Figs. 78–80 give examples of classes (5), (7),
and (8); Fig. 77 a specimen of class (6).[873]

[Illustration: FIG. 78. FUNNEL-VASE FROM TROY.]

The Hissarlik pottery may be regarded as a local development, partly
parallel with that of Cyprus,[874] partly derivative therefrom; of
Oriental influence there are no traces, but the connection with Thera
and Cyprus is indisputable.

[Illustration: FIG. 79. VASE IN FORM OF PIG, FROM TROY.]

Passing over the unimportant traces of the three succeeding
settlements, we find in the sixth city a great advance. The plastic
forms disappear, and generally speaking the shapes become more
classical. Besides plain pottery with matt-black polished surface we
meet with painted vases with curvilinear and vegetable patterns. The
remains of genuine Mycenaean pottery, the fortifications and buildings,
with great halls in the style of Mycenae and Tiryns, bear out Dr.
Dörpfeld’s contention that this is the Troy of Homer. Two points among
the pottery finds of this period are worth noting; firstly that they
included a fragment of Cypriote “white-slip” ware, secondly that
Geometrical patterns mingle with the Mycenaean in the upper layers.

[Illustration: FIG. 80. VASE WITH TWO NECKS (TROY).]

The three remaining layers cover respectively the archaic period, the
developed Hellenic and Hellenistic periods, and the age in which the
city of Ilium was refounded by the Romans. Dr. Dörpfeld found some
interesting local fabrics dating from the fifth century, examples of
which had previously been obtained by Mr. Calvert for the British
Museum.[875]

                  *       *       *       *       *

Of almost equal antiquity with the remains at Hissarlik is some of the
pottery discovered in the Cyclades, and especially at =Thera=. Here,
indeed, we meet with the earliest known examples of Greek _painted_
pottery (Crete excepted), and that, as we shall see, of a remarkably
developed type.

The island of Thera may be described as a sort of prehistoric Pompeii
buried under volcanic deposits, which have completely transformed the
configuration of the island. The results of preliminary excavations by
the French in 1866 showed that the cataclysm which overwhelmed the
island must (on geological grounds) have taken place about the
twentieth century B.C., and that the remains of pottery must be
anterior to this event.[876] Herodotos[877] states that Kadmos founded
a settlement in the fourteenth century, and the Minyae again about the
twelfth, and the island must have been uninhabitable for a long time
previously.

The houses and other remains of civilisation discovered below the
volcanic deposits show an advance on Hissarlik (second city) and the
earliest Cypriote culture, and the pottery is no exception. The vases
are wheel-made, fired at a moderate heat in closed furnaces (sometimes
baked in the sun), and plastic forms are almost wanting.[878] Many are
pierced with holes in the bottom, for what purpose is not known. They
were often found _in situ_, mixed with stone implements, and with
evidence of having contained grain. The forms are very regular, a
cylindrical shape being specially affected, and they are made of a
badly levigated clay, covered with a greyish slip, on which the
patterns are laid in _matt_ colours—white, black, or red—without any
incised markings.

[Illustration:

  From _Baumeister_.
  FIG. 81. VASES FROM THERA.
]

M. Dumont distinguishes four varieties of ornament: simple patterns,
such as bands, hatchings, and dots; volutes, wave-patterns, and
intersecting circles; vegetable motives, such as long narrow leaves or
flowers; and animals, including deer, and ducks or swans. Generally
there is a strong predilection for vegetable motives, and in this
naturalistic tendency we may see the prelude to the Mycenaean period.
Among those now at the French School at Athens, which has the best
collection, are several interesting examples illustrated in Fig.
81.[879] One is a trefoil-mouthed jug with running quadrupeds in black,
and red bands, on a grey ground; another jug is painted with birds in
black, the details in red and white. A sort of cream-jug is decorated
with water-plant patterns; a cylindrical jar with oblique wreaths; and
a dish with seaweed. A funnel-shaped vase and a beak-mouthed jug are
obvious prototypes of Mycenaean forms.

The chief differences from the Hissarlik vases are in the forms and
methods of decoration, but resemblances may be noted in the long narrow
necks, and the rings for suspension, as in the plastic forms when they
do occur. That the fabric is a local one hardly admits of doubt, but it
is interesting to note the occurrence of a bowl of white-slip ware from
Cyprus in Thera,[880] and conversely the appearance of a vase of Thera
fabric at Mycenae.[881] Thus we have evidence of extensive commercial
relations. Some tombs of the Hellenic period seem to have been dug
right down into the volcanic deposit, for they contained pottery with
Geometrical decoration.[882]

The discovery of primitive stone idols in Thera shows that it belonged
to the Cycladic civilisation, which extended from 2500 to 1600 B.C.,
filling up the gap between Hissarlik and Mycenae. It has been suggested
that these Cycladic peoples were Carians,[883] subsequently driven to
the Asiatic mainland by Minos, who typifies the rising power of Crete
and the Mycenaean world.[884] This Cycladic civilisation is also
exemplified in the earliest finds from other islands, such as Amorgos,
Syra, Paros, and Antiparos, and in other instances noted early in the
century by the observant traveller Ross.[885] The pottery from these
sites is, however, less advanced than that of Thera, but varies in
character. Painted patterns were found on vases from Amorgos and Syra,
the latter in the form of brown foliage on yellow ground.

It would not be right to conclude this section without some notice of
the remarkably interesting pottery excavated at Phylakopi in =Melos= by
the British School in 1896–99, which is important as forming a
connecting link between the Cycladic wares and the fully-developed
Mycenaean style. Space forbids more than a brief abstract of the
results obtained, which have just been given to the world in an
admirable publication.[886] Mr. C. C. Edgar, to whom the task of
studying the pottery was allotted, distinguishes four main groups:

    1. (_a_) Primitive pottery of the cist-tomb type, corresponding to
      that of Hissarlik; (_b_) more advanced ware of the same kind.

    2. Painted Geometrical wares.

    3. Local pottery in Mycenaean style with spiral and naturalistic
      designs, falling into two divisions, earlier and later.

    4. Imported Mycenaean pottery of the third and fourth styles (see
      below, p. 271).

Generally speaking the pottery is of local make, and Phylakopi seems to
have been an important centre in the early Mycenaean period, having
considerable intercourse with Crete. The earliest wares (class 1)
include plain pottery, hand-made, with burnished brown surface or
simple incised patterns; those of class 2 are painted in lustrous or
matt black on a white slip, or in white on lustrous black or red, with
simple patterns; they appear to be hand-made. The Mycenaean pottery is
more or less akin to that found elsewhere in the Aegean.


                               § 3. Crete

                              BIBLIOGRAPHY

    Dumont-Pottier, i. p. 64 (finds in 1878 at Knossos); Milchhoefer,
      _Anfänge der Kunst_; Furtwaengler and Loeschcke, _Myken. Vasen_,
      p. 22; Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ i. p. 173; _Mon. Antichi_, vi. p.
      333 ff.; _J.H.S._ xxi. p. 78 ff., xxiii. p. 157 ff.; _British
      School Annual_, vi. p. 85 ff., vii. p. 51, and ix. p. 297 ff.;
      _Proc. Soc. Antiqs._ xv. (1894), p. 351 ff.

In turning our attention next to the island of Crete, we are confronted
with a new element in Greek archaeology; namely, the results of the
recent discoveries, which as yet have hardly become material ripe for
use in a general handbook. On the other hand, their singular importance
deserves full recognition. It must, therefore, be borne in mind that
much in the succeeding section is merely the embodiment of previous
researches, and that the new evidence can only be briefly summarised.

Allusion has just been made to the thalassocracy of Minos and its
bearing on the history of early Greek civilisations, and the recent
discoveries have done much to show that the prince who built the great
palace at Knossos in the early days of Mycenaean civilisation, if he is
not actually the Minos of Greek legend, yet represents the rising power
which extended its dominion over the Aegean and drove the Carian people
to the mainland. This supremacy of Crete from the fifteenth to the
eleventh century was artistic as well as political. The Crete of Minos
was, moreover, the point of contact between the Aegean peoples and the
Oriental races; and in the story of the Minotaur we may perhaps see a
reflection of the human sacrifices offered to the Phoenician Moloch or
Melkarth. The familiar passage in Homer[887] which deals with the
ethnography of Crete speaks of four component elements, which may be
explained as (1) the Eteokretes, or aborigines of the island, to whom
the early civilisation exemplified in their ceramic and glyptic
products is mainly due; (2) the Kydonii or Leleges, brought by Minos
from the islands[888]; (3) the Achaeans or mainland Greeks of the
period of the Trojan War; (4) the Dorians, whose connection with the
island dates from the eleventh century onwards.

Even before the recent excavations pottery had been found in Crete
which dated from the dawn of the Mycenaean period, and from the
island’s early connection with Egypt was thought to be contemporaneous
with that of Hissarlik and Thera. From the circumstances of its first
appearance in any quantity at Kamaraes, in the plain of Ida, it has
usually been named after that place. Dr. Orsi discovered two fragments
of Hissarlik type at Phaestos,[889] also a vase of island type, one of
Thera type,[890] and some early Cypriote wares.[891] Large numbers of
fragments of this ware in the Museum at Candia were first noted by Dr.
Orsi and Mr. J. L. Myres about 1894.[892] The extensive discoveries
made by Messrs. Hogarth and Welch for the British School at Athens in
1899–1900 (see p. 60) have added still further to our knowledge of the
ware; and these, taken in conjunction with Mr. Arthur Evans’s extensive
finds at Knossos (1899–1902), have enabled a recent writer to draw up a
tentative classification of all the prehistoric pottery of Crete.[893]

In his paper Mr. Mackenzie divides the pottery into three main classes,
which he distinguishes as Neolithic, Early and Middle Minoan, and Late
Minoan. The first-named extends down to about 3000 B.C.; the second
covers the period 3000–2000 B.C.; and the third (including Mycenaean
pottery of the usual types) lasts down to 1500 B.C., about which time
the Cretan supremacy came to an end, and the Mycenaean centre of
gravity was shifted to the mainland of Greece.

(1) Pottery of the Neolithic period is quite exceptional in Aegean
localities; yet the evidence from the excavations is so unmistakable
that there can be no question of its great antiquity. It consists of
common household vessels of grey clay, hand-made and burnished; at
first devoid of decoration, but subsequently fragments appear with
incised patterns filled in with white. These, it may be noted, may help
to date the analogous wares from Troy and Egypt. The black surface
becomes more and more lustrous, and in some cases a sort of rippling
effect is produced in the soft clay with a blunt instrument[894];
finally an age of decline manifests itself, but at the same time an
advance is made from filling in hollows with white to painting in
colours on the flat surface.

(2) The pottery in this stage is still hand-made; but the clay, which
is of a brick or terracotta colour, is greatly improved, and shows that
a potter’s oven must have been employed. The most remarkable feature is
that, along with the white or polychrome patterns on dark ground, the
origin of which has been noted, there appear vases with patterns in
lustrous dark colour on buff ground, like the Mycenaean wares. Hitherto
it had been supposed that the latter process was much later than the
other[895]; but the Cretan evidence admits of no doubt as to their
synchronism, even at this early stage of painted pottery in any form.
The pre-Mycenaean character of the Early Minoan deposits is, for
instance, proved by the entire absence of plain pottery of Mycenaean
types. It is then clear that Crete developed both independently of, and
with far greater rapidity than, the rest of the Aegean at this period.
The painted patterns are usually of a Geometrical character.[896]

The middle deposits of the third millennium, found above the floors of
the first palace, are, like the preceding, both polychrome and
monochrome in their decoration. The former include most of the types
formerly known as Kamaraes ware, the patterns being mainly but not
exclusively Geometrical; the curvilinear are rather later in date. The
commonest shape is one resembling a tea-cup.[897] In the next stage
relief-work is introduced to enhance the polychrome effect, probably in
imitation of metal. In the latest deposits a great decline is manifest,
and the monochrome vases tend to assert themselves to the exclusion of
the others.

That the period under discussion must have been one of great length is
shown by the depth of the “Minoan” deposits; they are, moreover, so
extensive at Knossos, and so scanty and isolated are examples from
other sites, that it cannot be doubted that here we have the centre of
the fabric. As regards their date we have good evidence from early
Aegean deposits in Egypt. By means of Professor Petrie’s finds at Kahun
in the Fayûm, which include specimens of the best Minoan ware,[898] we
are able to place the height of the period about 2500 B.C.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                               PLATE XIV

[Illustration:

  From _Brit. School Annual_, ix.
  STAND FOR VASE; KAMARAES WARE.
  FROM PALAIOKASTRO, CRETE.
]

                  ------------------------------------

The appearance of the so-called Kamaraes ware is unmistakable, with its
bright, almost gay, aspect, and the contrast of the colours with the
lustrous black ground. The pigments employed are four in number—milky
white, yellow ochre, brick-red, and purple-red. These vases are mostly
made on the wheel, and the buff-coloured clay is fairly well levigated,
as is the slip, on which the pigments are directly laid; its lustre
often almost rivals that of the best Hellenic pottery. Mr. Evans found
some specimens in 1902 of an extremely delicate character, almost as
thin as an egg-shell. The colours are, however, sometimes dull and
powdery, and apt to flake away except when fired. The forms are of a
Cycladic type, the favourite being a two-handled globular vase with
spout, and a pear-shaped one-handled vase, also with a spout[899] (see
also Plate XIV.[900]).

The decoration is, as has been indicated, plastic as well as pictorial;
the relief ornaments are often of an elaborate type, as may be seen in
some of Mr. Hogarth’s finds.[901] Some vases are merely covered with
knobs, or with a sort of honeycombing in relief[902]; in others toothed
or bossed bands are employed, either simply or combined into complex
patterns. In any case this plastic element is quite a new departure.
The pictorial designs include geometrical and linear patterns, zigzags,
network, concentric circles, spirals, and swastikas; leaves, rosettes,
and other vegetable forms; fishes, and even in one case a human
figure.[903] The chief field of decoration is the shoulder of the vase.

Although varying in the extent of their naturalism, the patterns
exhibit considerable boldness and power of drawing; they seem to be
drawn chiefly from floral or textile sources, and are closely parallel
to the Thera vases, but more advanced. Some motives are of Mycenaean
character, such as the use of rows of white dots[904]; on the other
hand, the style of the fishes and human figure is more like that of the
Geometrical vases.

Mr. Hogarth notes that metal types of Kamaraes cups appear in the hands
of Kefti tributaries in the paintings of the tomb of Rekhmara (about
1550 B.C.), and he even found their Neolithic prototypes at Kephala,
near Knossos.[905] He also traces a connection with the early Aegean
pottery of Phylakopi in Melos. The Kamaraes pottery can be shown not to
have survived the incoming of the new Mycenaean influences, but the
patterns rapidly became conventionalised, and are replaced by the new
motives of the Mycenaean wares. It may further be noted that fragments
of Kamaraes ware have turned up not only in Egypt, as at Kahun (already
mentioned), but at Tiryns, in the fifth and sixth Acropolis graves at
Mycenae, and at Curium in Cyprus.

(3) The pottery of the “Late Minoan” period from the palace of Knossos
falls into two groups—the “palace” style, and the ordinary Mycenaean
fabrics. The former class of vases has been found in considerable
numbers in the second palace, and also at Zakro and other sites. The
vases are painted in a lustrous brown-to-black glaze on a buff
hand-polished slip, with fine and elaborate naturalistic designs,
including vegetable patterns, birds, and fishes; others, again, are
more architectonic in character.[906] We also find adaptations of the
Kamaraes style, with bands of white paint laid on the black varnish,
the usual forms being a flat bowl and a small cup with flat handles
like the Vaphio cups.[907]

In their decoration the most highly developed varieties of the “palace”
style show a parallelism with the wall-paintings, the patterns
consisting of rosettes, spirals, and conventional flowers; in some very
naturalistic examples this is strongly marked, the designs of olive and
myrtle wreaths and bulbous plants showing an almost Japanese fidelity
to nature. Others, again, have marine subjects—seaweed, shells, and
rocks. Lastly, there are the representations of the double axe, which
Mr. Evans has shown to be a religious symbol.[908]

The whole of this pottery belongs to the third or highest period of
Mycenaean pottery, a time when decadence was actually beginning to set
in, concurrent with the end of the eighteenth dynasty. At this time all
over the Aegean area, in Melos, Egypt, and elsewhere, the styles of
pottery were perfectly uniform, and had clearly been imported from one
centre. In the light of recent discoveries we can no longer doubt that
this centre was Crete, and the previous history of its pottery and the
early development of its technical processes, as well as its
geographical position, point in the same direction. About the year 1500
B.C. the site appears to have been invaded and abandoned, with the
consequent result that Mycenaean civilisation now spread all over the
Aegean, centring chiefly in Greece, where it lasted several centuries
longer. Of its influence on Cyprus we have already spoken.

Mycenaean vases had turned up in Crete for some time previous to 1899
in a sporadic fashion[909]; but these, being for the most part of the
ordinary type, do not call for separate consideration. There is,
however, one class that appears to be peculiar to the island. It
consists of large “false amphorae” and other vases, made of a rough
coarse-grained clay, and decorated in the “third Mycenaean” style with
large cuttle-fish; at Knossos this was found only outside the palace,
and was probably a coarse household ware. A good specimen has also been
found at Curium in Cyprus.[910]

                         § 4. MYCENAEAN POTTERY

                              BIBLIOGRAPHY

    Furtwaengler and Loeschcke, _Mykenische Thongefässe_ (1879), and
      _Mykenische Vasen_ (1886); Dumont-Pottier, i. p. 47 ff.; Perrot,
      _Hist. de l’Art_, vi. p. 893 ff.; Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ i. p.
      181 ff. General reference should also be made to Schuchhardt,
      _Schliemann’s Excavations_ (transl. E. Sellers); Schliemann’s own
      works; Hall, _Oldest Civilisation of Greece_; Tsountas and
      Manatt, _The Mycenaean Age_; and other works.

We have already had occasion to deal to some extent with Mycenaean
pottery in connection with Cyprus and Crete, but it is now necessary to
review it as a whole in the light of the present state of our knowledge
of this wonderful civilisation and its products. To enter here upon the
wide and much-debated questions to which the discoveries of the last
thirty years have given rise is of course beyond our province; but the
pottery of the people to whom the name Mycenaean has been somewhat
loosely given is of so homogeneous a character, although found in all
parts of the Mediterranean, that it may be treated as a phase of Greek
ceramics, independently of considerations of ethnography and
chronology. First found in any quantity at Ialysos in the island of
Rhodes, its exact position in the history of early art was not then
recognised; but when the marvellous discoveries of Heinrich Schliemann
at Mycenae became known to the world, including large numbers of
similar vases, Sir Charles Newton readily recognised that the Ialysos
vases in the British Museum belonged to the same class. It was not long
before the whole number of vases of this type, now christened
Mycenaean, was collected in a “Corpus” by two German scholars, with
numerous illustrations; but since that time the excavations of
“Mycenaean” sites in Cyprus and Crete must have doubled or even trebled
the material available.

The pottery at Mycenae was found in four different positions, implying
consecutive chronological stages, ranging roughly from the fifteenth to
the tenth or even ninth century. On these grounds Furtwaengler and
Loeschcke[911] distinguished four main classes; but it will be seen
that these are capable of even more subdivision. There are, in fact,
two main classes, distinguished by the use of _matt_ and lustrous
colour respectively; and of the first of these two, of the second four,
subdivisions are possible.

Class (1) is indeed comparatively rare,[912] and only found at Thera
and in the oldest tombs on the Mycenaean Acropolis; it represents the
transition from the pottery of Troy and Thera to that of Mycenae. The
subdivision is a purely technical one: (_a_) vases of pale coarse clay,
with patterns in a brown colour, some hand-made[913]; (_b_) wheel-made
vases of a reddish and finer clay, the designs in black and pale red,
occasionally white.[914] The decoration generally resembles that of the
Thera vases, and animals occasionally appear.

(2) The vases with lustrous painting may be classified as follows:

   (_a_) Badly levigated clay; floral motives in matt-white or
     red-brown on black ground.[915] A fine example of this class was
     recently excavated at Maroni in Cyprus, a large krater with a
     figure of a bird outlined in white on either side (Plate XII.).

   (_b_) Similar clay, but coated with a white or yellow slip on which
     geometrical or floral patterns are painted in lustrous black.[916]

   (_c_) Fine clay with polished yellow surface; designs in black
     turning to red or yellow, with occasional details in white;
     chiefly marine plants and animals, but occasionally (especially in
     Cyprus) human figures.[917] This class is by far the most numerous
     of all, but is not found in Thera. It corresponds with the period
     1400–1000 B.C.

   (_d_) Clay grey or reddish, less brilliant, as is also the black;
     large figures of quadrupeds and human figures.[918] The vases are
     sometimes painted _inside_, which is a sign of late date.

The structure of these vases is very varied, and no less than 122
different forms may be distinguished in the illustrations to the
_Mykenische Vasen_. Most characteristic and popular is the “false
amphora,” as it is generally termed (German, _Bügelkanne_), a vase with
spheroidal body, of varying size, with the peculiarity that the
ordinary neck and mouth on the top are closed by a flat handle arching
over the vase, and the only aperture is a spout on one side (see Plate
XV. and Fig. 82). These are very widely distributed, but their
decoration is as a rule very simple; they appear depicted on the
paintings of Egyptian tombs of the eighteenth dynasty, and this has
often been used as an argument for the dating of Mycenaean vases. But
they must have remained in favour for a considerable period. Other
favourite shapes are: a funnel-shaped vase with handle at the top,
doubtless a reminiscence of a Hissarlik type (p. 258); a tall graceful
two-handled goblet or kylix, almost invariably decorated with
cuttle-fish (see Plate XV.), as the funnel-vases are with murex (purple
dye) shells; a beaked jug (German _Schnabelkanne_), derived from Thera;
a squat jar or pyxis, with three small handles (cf. Fig. 82); and a
tall pear-shaped vase with three handles on a high stem, which is
perhaps the prototype of the hydria. The large kraters are, as we have
seen, peculiar to Cyprus. Rarer forms are a sort of mug, and a
combination of the false amphora and pyxis. Mention should also be made
of the painted ????a?e? or _ossuaria_ found in Crete by Mr. J. H.
Marshall (p. 268 above) and by Dr. Orsi.[919]

The technique presents several entirely new features, such as the use
of a slip as a basis for the colours; the polished, brilliant, and even
surface; and above all the lustrous black varnish, which was the
peculiar pride of Greek potters, and is now a lost art. The comparative
monotony of the colouring is probably due to a purely technical reason,
namely, the difficulty of resisting the action of fire; otherwise such
an artistic people would doubtless have exhibited the same richness of
colouring in their pottery that we find in their frescoes.

The Mycenaean pottery is deservedly held in high estimation for its
picturesque and naturalistic style, which in its reproduction of animal
and vegetable forms often rivals Japanese art. Although its scope is
remarkably wide, yet there is a strong preference for marine
subjects—the cuttle-fish, the murex shell, the nautilus, and various
kinds of seaweed or such plants as the _Vallisneria spiralis_ (Chapter
XVI.). In Fig. 82 two good examples in the British Museum are
illustrated—one from Egypt, the other from Kalymnos.[920] Altogether
there is an originality and poetry of ideas such as never appears again
in Greek art; but that is not a peculiar possession of the potters, as
the metal-work, gem-engraving, and fresco-paintings testify—above all,
such masterpieces as the Vaphio gold cups, or some of the
wall-paintings recently discovered in Crete.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                                PLATE XV

[Illustration:

  MYCENAEAN POTTERY
  (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

                                                     _To face page 273._

                  ------------------------------------

Religious ideas, on the other hand, are strangely conspicuous by their
absence. Mycenaean mythology is so far almost nonexistent in the art;
and although attempts have at times been made to detect traces of early
cults, as in the figures of men dressed as animals,[921] or the
representations of the double axe,[922] they have not as yet met with
universal acceptance. More improbable is the curious idea recently
mooted,[923] that the subjects of the vase-paintings indicate an
acquaintance with such theories as those of biological evolution.

[Illustration: FIG. 82. MYCENAEAN VASES WITH MARINE SUBJECTS (BRIT.
MUS.).]

Mycenaean pottery has been found on a very large number of sites
throughout the Mediterranean. The most productive have been Mycenae,
Crete, and Cyprus, especially the cemetery at Enkomi in the latter
island. Other Cypriote centres are Curium, Agia Paraskevi near Nicosia,
Maroni, and the neighbourhood of Dali and Larnaka (see p. 66). In
Attica the Acropolis of Athens and the beehive tombs of Spata and
Menidi have been most fruitful, and finds have been made at Haliki and
elsewhere. In the Peloponnese the chief site is Tiryns, and many
fragments have also been found at Nauplia; in Central Greece several
sites in Boeotia, such as Orchomenos, may be mentioned. Of the Aegean
islands, Rhodes and Melos are most conspicuous, especially the sites of
Ialysos in the former island, Phylakopi in the latter. In Asia Minor,
Mycenaean remains are rare, except at Troy, but in Egypt there is ample
evidence of a close commercial relation, as in the finds at
Tell-el-Amarna, in the Fayûm, and elsewhere. In the Western
Mediterranean, Syracuse has yielded numerous fragments, and occasional
finds have been made in Italy.[924]

Having reviewed the extent of Mycenaean influence, the next question we
must consider is which, if any, was the centre whence this pottery was
exported. It had been for some time observed that the early varieties
of Thera, and those of Crete and Cyprus (_v. supra_), showed strong
indications of local origin; but on the whole the Mycenaean pottery
proper is remarkably uniform and homogeneous. It is perhaps possible to
detect technical differences between the pottery, _e.g._, of Athens and
Rhodes, but they may be only differences of date rather than fabric.
Furtwaengler and Loeschcke regarded Argolis as the centre of
manufacture, at least for the later lustrous varieties[925]; Pottier,
on the other hand, writing before the recent discoveries, thought that
Crete was, after Thera, the original centre, and Argolis only
subsequently, the pottery of Rhodes lying midway between. In the light
of the Cretan discoveries it is now possible largely to disregard
previous theories. We have seen that Mycenaean pottery found in Crete
has a pedigree which no other region can claim, and that it can only
have a local origin. We have also seen that the Cretan supremacy came
to an end about 1500 B.C., and that, though the pottery may have
continued to be made in the island, it ceased to be an exclusive
centre, and for the remainder of the Mycenaean Age the art, learned in
Crete, spread to other Aegean centres—Mycenae, Rhodes, and Cyprus.

A far more difficult question to decide is the ethnographical one,
together with the consideration of the relation of the Mycenaean
civilisation to others in which the same decoration appears (as in the
case of the spiral). One point seems to be abundantly clear, viz. that
Mycenaean decoration owes nothing to Oriental influences. That there
was a close relation with the East has already been indicated, and is
much more apparent in other forms of Mycenaean art; but no student of
this art in general can doubt that it is, as has been pointed out,
purely spontaneous and unique, the art of a people of genuine artistic
genius. Among the art of ancient races it stands alone in this respect,
that of Egypt and Assyria, its only prominent rivals, being always
essentially conventional; and herein lies its special distinction.

That the Mycenaeans were a maritime people admits of no doubt. It is
shown by the position of their chief centres, by the evidence of their
extensive commercial relations, and, as far as concerns their pottery,
pre-eminently by the subjects which form the staple decoration. Hence
of late years an attempt has been made to substitute for “Mycenaean”
the more comprehensive term “Aegean,” and there is much to be said in
its favour. As regards the actual ethnographical position of the race,
_Quot homines, tot sententiae_, may almost be said. They have been
identified with the Achaeans, the Pelasgians, the Phoenicians, the
Carians, and as combinations of Phrygians with Cretans, of Phoenicians
with Greeks of Asia Minor.[926] But few of these terms have real
historical value, and such identifications do not really advance the
solution of the question.

A more real ground of battle is that afforded by the question of date,
though on this point scholars now show a greater tendency to fall into
line, and a period culminating in the years 1400 to 1100 or 1000 B.C.
is now very generally accepted.[927] The question necessarily turns
largely on the evidence afforded by Crete and Egypt, and so far as this
is trustworthy it all points in the same direction. But it would be
beyond the scope of a work of this kind to do more than briefly
summarise the general results of archaeological criticism.

An interesting study of Mycenaean ornamentation has been made by Dr.
Riegl,[928] who deals generally with the principles underlying its
vegetable motives, and points out that here we first meet with scrolls
or continuous bands of foliage applied to a decorative purpose. These
motives are peculiar to Greek art, and in Mycenaean design their origin
is to be sought. In this way we may regard it as the immediate
forerunner of Hellenic art, although its development was temporarily
arrested by the Dorian invasion, just as the people who produced it
formed the basis of the Hellenic race. The naturalism of Mycenaean
ornament, which is seen both in continuous and in isolated patterns, is
in marked contrast to the convention of Egypt, where the same motives
may be in use. It is not, in short, the motive, but its treatment,
which shows the independence of Mycenaean art. There are, again, other
patterns, such as the spiral, which cannot be traced in Oriental art,
and seem to be purely original, at least as far as concerns the Eastern
Mediterranean.

Another recent writer, Dr. S. Wide, has noticed that where Mycenaean
influence was originally strongest, as in Crete and Rhodes, there its
characteristics were most strongly impressed upon the art of the
succeeding period, and he is inclined to place the centre of the fabric
in these islands or on the coast of the adjoining continent of Asia. At
all events the Mycenaean influence shows itself more in the pottery of
the islands than it does in Attica; and, in Crete and Rhodes in
particular, instances have been found of undoubted survivals of typical
Mycenaean ornaments in later pottery.[929]

-----

Footnote 820:

  See _Cyprus Mus. Cat._ p. 14.

Footnote 821:

  Cf. Perrot, _Hist. de l’Art_, iii. figs. 487–93.

Footnote 822:

  Cf. Perrot, _op. cit._ iii. figs. 498–503.

Footnote 823:

  See Hall, _Oldest Civilisation of Greece_, p. 72.

Footnote 824:

  See _Athen. Mitth._ xi. p. 249 ff., and Perrot, _Hist. de l’Art_, vi.
  p. 648. A fragment of late Bronze-Age Cypriote pottery was found at
  Hissarlik (Dörpfeld, _Troja und Ilion_, i. p. 286, fig. 182).

Footnote 825:

  See Meursius, _Cyprus_, i. chap. 20; Heuzey, _Cat. des Fig. ant. du
  Louvre_, p. 115.

Footnote 826:

  Strabo, xiv. 6, p. 683.

Footnote 827:

  _Archaeologia_, xlv. p. 127 ff.

Footnote 828:

  Similar red polished wares were found in the New-Race tombs of Egypt
  (seventh to tenth dynasty), but in spite of the likeness it cannot be
  said that one is borrowed from the other (_Cyprus Mus. Cat._ p. 16).

Footnote 829:

  See Hall, _Oldest Greek Civilisation_, p. 69; _Journ. Hell. Stud._
  xi. pl. 14; _Cyprus Mus. Cat._ p. 38.

Footnote 830:

  The resemblance to Italian bucchero ware is probably only accidental.
  See Chapter XVIII.

Footnote 831:

  _E.g._ A 66 in B.M.

Footnote 832:

  Hall, _Oldest Civilisation_, pp. 72, 98.

Footnote 833:

  _E.g._ B.M. A 67–8.

Footnote 834:

  Cf. _Excavations in Cyprus_, pp. 34 ff., 72.

Footnote 835:

  _Cyprus Mus. Cat._ p. 39.

Footnote 836:

  Myres, _ibid._

Footnote 837:

  Cf. for instance the jug given in Cesnola, _Cyprus_, p. 408, fig. 29.

Footnote 838:

  _E.g._ B.M. A 134: cf. _Cyprus Mus. Cat._ 401–2.

Footnote 839:

  _Cat. des Vases du Louvre_, i. p. 250: see below, pp. 284, 315.

Footnote 840:

  The Trojan legends were familiar in Cyprus, as the ??p??a?? of the
  local Cyclic poet Stasinos shows.

Footnote 841:

  Cf. Perrot, _Hist, de l’Art_, iii. pp. 714–15, figs. 525–26.

Footnote 842:

  _Excavations in Cyprus_, p. 73.

Footnote 843:

  Recent discoveries by Mr. Arthur Evans at Knossos (_Brit. Sch.
  Annual_, 1901–2, p. 15) seem to suggest that these panels may be
  meant for windows or storeys of houses. Cf. also the bronze from
  Enkomi (_Excavations_, p. 10).

Footnote 844:

  _Cyprus Mus. Cat._ p. 59.

Footnote 845:

  _Excavations in Cyprus_, p. 74.

Footnote 846:

  See _Athen. Mitth._ xi. (1886), p. 248; cf. also Meursius, _Cyprus_,
  i. chap. 10; Heuzey, _Cat. des Fig. ant. du Louvre_, pp. 116–17.

Footnote 847:

  Cypriote pottery with concentric circles has been found at Nebesheh
  in the Delta. It was brought by the Cypriote mercenaries, enrolled by
  Psammetichus, in the seventh century (_Eg. Expl. Fund_, 4th Mem. pl.
  3, p. 20).

Footnote 848:

  Perrot, _Hist. de l’Art_, iii. p. 769 ff.

Footnote 849:

  M. Pottier (_Louvre Cat._ i. p. 92) thinks that Greek influence may
  explain all the stages of Cypriote pottery from the Mycenaean period
  onwards. See also on this subject Dümmler, in _Ath. Mitth._ xi. p.
  284.

Footnote 850:

  _Excavations in Cyprus_, p. 8, fig. 14.

Footnote 851:

  B.M. C 244.

Footnote 852:

  B.M. C 121 = Perrot, _Hist. de l’Art_, iii. pp. 716–17, figs. 527–8.

Footnote 853:

  B.M. C 120 = _Rev. Arch._ ix. (1887), p. 77 ff.

Footnote 854:

  _Cyprus Mus. Cat._ p. 26.

Footnote 855:

  _Ibid._ p. 21.

Footnote 856:

  See Perrot, _Hist. de l’Art_, iii. figs. 510–13; _ibid._ figs. 520–23
  (human figures); Cesnola, _Cyprus_, p. 55, pls. 44–6; _Excavations in
  Cyprus_, pp. 75, 104 ff.; _J.H.S._ v. p. 103.

Footnote 857:

  See above, p. 249. Cf. Layard, _Monuments of Nineveh_, pl. 10 =
  Nimroud Gallery of B.M., slab 4_a_.

Footnote 858:

  Perrot, _op. cit._ iii. p. 711, fig. 523.

Footnote 859:

  _E.g._ Perrot, _op. cit._ iii. figs. 507, 523, pp. 699, 711;
  _Excavations in Cyprus_, pp. 104–5, figs. 151–52.

Footnote 860:

  _Excavations in Cyprus_, p. 105, fig. 152.

Footnote 861:

  B.M. C 268 = _J.H.S._ ii. p. 304.

Footnote 862:

  _Cyprus_, pl. 29.

Footnote 863:

  See O.-Richter, _Kypros, the Bible, and Homer_, p. 497, and
  frontispiece to text volume; also _B.M. Excavations in Cyprus_, p.
  105, fig. 152.

Footnote 864:

  B.M. E 34; _Branteghem Cat._ 30; Klein, _Meistersig._^2 p. 221.

Footnote 865:

  Louvre A 258.

Footnote 866:

  _E.g._ _J.H.S._ xii. pl. 14; _Jahrbuch_, 1887, pl. 11.

Footnote 867:

  See Hermann, _Gräberfeld von Marion_, p. 46 ff.; _B.M. Excavations in
  Cyprus_, pp. 78, 109.

Footnote 868:

  _Excavations in Cyprus_, p. 78, Fig. 110.

Footnote 869:

  _Troja 1893_, p. 86; _Troja u. Ilion_, i. p. 18. On the pottery
  generally see the latter, p. 243 ff.

Footnote 870:

  Its evolution is well illustrated by the Canopic vases described in
  Chapter XVIII.

Footnote 871:

  _Céramiques_, i. p. 6: see for examples _ibid._ pp. 7, 11.

Footnote 872:

  A jug with beak-shaped mouth, called by the Germans a
  _Schnabelkanne_. The base-ring to which he alludes is not apparent.
  Cf. for the type Fig. 81 below, from Thera.

Footnote 873:

  See Schliemann, _Ilios_, pp. 340, 372, 375, 384.

Footnote 874:

  Cf. _Cyprus Mus. Cat._ p. 18.

Footnote 875:

  _ibid._, p. 118; _ibid._, i. p. 310; B.M. B 83 ff.; and see p. 339.

Footnote 876:

  See Fouqué, _Santorin_, _passim_; Dumont-Pottier, i. p. 28; Hiller
  von Gaertringen, _Thera_, i. p. 36 ff.

Footnote 877:

  iv. 147–48.

Footnote 878:

  One is given by Dumont-Pottier, pl. 2, fig. 13.

Footnote 879:

  See Dumont-Pottier, p. 21, figs. 32–3, pls. 1, 2.

Footnote 880:

  Furtwaengler and Loeschcke, _Myken. Vasen_, pl. 12, No. 80.

Footnote 881:

  Fouqué, _op. cit._ p. 127, note.

Footnote 882:

  On the later pottery from Thera see generally Hiller von Gaertringen,
  _Thera_, ii. p. 127 ff.; _Ath. Mitth._ 1903, p. 1 ff.

Footnote 883:

  Dümmler (Ath. Mitth. 1886, p. 45) calls them “Leleges”; but he places
  Minos in the Geometrical period.

Footnote 884:

  Cf. Hdt. i. 171, and Thuc. i. 4–8.

Footnote 885:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1886, p. 15; Ross, _Reisen durch die Inseln_, _passim_;
  Athens Mus. Nos. 23–9, 136, 142–43; _J.H.S._ v. p. 53 ff.

Footnote 886:

  _J.H.S._ _Suppl. Papers_, vol. iv. (1904).

Footnote 887:

  _Od._ xix. 172 ff.

Footnote 888:

  Hdt. i. 171.

Footnote 889:

  _Mon. Antichi_, vi. p. 342, pl. 12, figs. 50, 52.

Footnote 890:

  _Ibid._ pl. 11, figs. 44–5.

Footnote 891:

  _Ibid._ pl. 10, fig. 23; pl. 12, figs. 57, 59.

Footnote 892:

  _Mon. Antichi_, vi. p. 333 ff., pls. 9–11; _Proc. Soc. Antiqs._ 2nd
  Ser. xv. p. 351 ff.

Footnote 893:

  _J.H.S._ xxiii. p. 157 ff.

Footnote 894:

  _Ibid._ pl. 4, figs. 6–14.

Footnote 895:

  See, for instance, Furtwaengler and Loeschcke, _Myken. Vasen_, p. vi.

Footnote 896:

  _J.H.S._ xxi. p. 97, fig. 31, will serve as an example.

Footnote 897:

  _Ibid._ xxiii. p. 171.

Footnote 898:

  _Ibid._ xi. pl. 14, figs. 5–10, p. 275.

Footnote 899:

  Cf. _Mon. Antichi_, vi. pl. 9, fig. 8; pl. 10, fig. 14.

Footnote 900:

  From _Brit. School Annual_, ix. p. 308.

Footnote 901:

  _J.H.S._ xxi. pls. 6, 7, p. 84 ff.

Footnote 902:

  _Mon. Antichi_, vi. pl. 9, figs. 2, 6; pl. 10, fig. 14.

Footnote 903:

  _Ibid._ pl. 9, fig. 10.

Footnote 904:

  _Ibid._ p. 339.

Footnote 905:

  _Brit. School Annual_,  vi. p. 85. On the Kefti, see _ibid._ viii. p.
  157 ff.

Footnote 906:

  See for examples_J.H.S._ xxiii. p. 192 ff.

Footnote 907:

  _Brit. School Annual_, vi. p. 88.

Footnote 908:

  _J.H.S._ xxi. p. 99 ff. See the _larnax_ published by Mr. Bosanquet
  in _Brit. School Annual_, viii. pls. 18–9: cf. _ibid._ vii. p. 52.

Footnote 909:

  See Furtwaengler and Loeschcke, _Myken. Vasen_, pls. 13–4; _Ath.
  Mitth._ 1886, pl. 3 and pl. 4 (a large pithos with reliefs, for which
  compare p. 152 above); _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1880, p. 125, 1892, p.
  295; Perrot, _Hist. de l’Art_, vi. p. 451 ff.; Pottier, _Louvre Cat._
  i. p. 176.

Footnote 910:

  _Excavations in Cyprus_, p. 74, fig. 128. cf. Furtwaengler and
  Loeschcke, _op. cit._ pl. 14, No. 88; _Brit. School Annual_, vi. p.
  91.

Footnote 911:

  _Myken. Vasen_, p. vi. ff. The evidence from Crete, however, appears
  to upset this chronology, the vases with lustrous painting being
  there found on a level with the matt paintings on dark ground.

Footnote 912:

  For examples see Furtwaengler and Loeschcke, _Myken. Thongef._ pls.
  1; 4, 13; 5, 20; 7, 40; 11, 52.

Footnote 913:

  _Myken. Thongef._ pl. 1, fig. 6; _Myken. Vasen_, pls. 23–4.

Footnote 914:

  _Myken. Thongef._ pl. 8; pl. 11, 52; _Myken. Vasen_, pl. 23.

Footnote 915:

  _Myken. Thongef._ pl. 6, 32, 34.

Footnote 916:

  _Myken. Thongef._ pl. 12; _Myken. Vasen_, pls. 7, 25.

Footnote 917:

  Schliemann, _Tiryns_, pl. 22, p. 99, fig. 20; _Myken. Thongef._ pls.
  2, 4; _Myken. Vasen_, pls. 26–34, 39–41.

Footnote 918:

  _Myken. Vasen_, pls. 37–41.

Footnote 919:

  _Mon. Antichi_, i. p. 201 ff., pls. 1–2.

Footnote 920:

  See _J.H.S._ xvii. pp. 75, 76.

Footnote 921:

  Cook in _J.H.S._ xiv. p. 81 ff.

Footnote 922:

  Evans in _J.H.S._ xxi. p. 99 ff. Recent discoveries seem to leave
  little room for doubt as to the correctness of Mr. Evans' theories.

Footnote 923:

  _Rev. Arch._ xxvi. (1895), p. 1 ff.; xxx. (1897), p. 81 ff.: cf.
  _ibid._ xxviii. (1896), p. 24 ff.

Footnote 924:

  See _J.H.S._ xxiv. p. 125.

Footnote 925:

  _Myken. Vasen_, p. ix. ff.

Footnote 926:

  See for a summary of the theories, Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ i. p. 200
  ff.

Footnote 927:

  See Hall, _Oldest Civilisation_, chap. iii.; Pottier, _op. cit._ i.
  p. 209; and _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1892, p. 11 ff.

Footnote 928:

  _Stilfragen, p. 112 ff._

Footnote 929:

  See Wide, in _Ath. Mitth._ 1897, p. 233; and for some general
  considerations on Mycenaean pottery and its achievements, Pottier,
  _Louvre Cat._ i. p. 247.




                              CHAPTER VII
                    _RISE OF VASE-PAINTING IN GREECE_

    Geometrical decoration—Its origin—Distribution of pottery—Shapes
      and ornamentation of vases—Subjects—Dipylon vases—Boeotian
      Geometrical wares—Chronology—Proto-Attic fabrics—Phaleron
      ware—Later Boeotian vases—Melian amphorae—Corinth and its
      pottery—“Proto-Corinthian” vases—Vases with imbrications and
      floral decoration—Incised lines and ground-ornaments—Introduction
      of figure-subjects—Chalcidian vases—“Tyrrhenian Amphorae.”


                      § 1. THE GEOMETRICAL PERIOD

                              BIBLIOGRAPHY

    Perrot, _Hist. de l’Art_, vii. p. 154 ff.; _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1872,
      p. 138 ff.; _Jahrbuch_, 1886, p. 94 ff.; 1899, pp. 26, 78, 188;
      _Ath. Mitth._ 1881, p. 106; 1892, p. 285; 1893, p. 73 ff.; 1896,
      p. 385 ff.; Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ i. p. 212 ff. For Boeotian
      Geometrical pottery, Böhlau in _Jahrbuch_, 1888, p. 325 ff.; for
      early Argive wares, Waldstein, _Argive Heraeum_, i. p. 49 ff.

The Dorian invasion of Greece, which is generally supposed to have
taken place in the twelfth century—the traditional date is about 1100
B.C.—was, like the contemporaneous Etruscan immigration (Chapter
XVIII.), only an episode in the general displacement taking place
throughout Europe. In Greece it caused a dispersion of the Achaean
race, chiefly in the direction of Asia Minor, which, as we have already
seen, probably gave rise to the stories of the Trojan War and
subsequent adventures of the Achaean leaders. In other words, the
Mycenaean civilisation was driven to seek a new home elsewhere, and to
lay the foundations of a new artistic development in the cities of
Aeolis and Ionia. But its disappearance from Greece was not complete,
and Hellenic Greece was from the beginning an amalgam of the old and
new elements, the Achaean (or Ionian) and the Dorian, in which one or
the other had at different times or in different places the
pre-eminence. The Ionian element represents the civilisation of the
Mediterranean, succeeding to that of the Mycenaean world; the Dorian,
the influence of Central Europe.[930]

It has hitherto been a truism of archaeology that the Dorians brought
with them from Central Europe a new form of art, of which the chief
characteristic is that of _rectilinear and geometrical decoration_,
forming, it is obvious, a marked contrast to the curvilinear and
naturalistic Mycenaean designs. This new principle was thought to be
most conspicuously illustrated by the pottery which now replaces the
Mycenaean. But certain recent discoveries have given occasion for some
scepticism in regard to the acceptance of this idea as conveying the
whole truth; and even if they do not radically alter preconceived
ideas, they are at least worthy of consideration.

At Aphidna in Attica a find has been made of very rude pottery, without
glaze or varnish, but with decoration of a Geometrical character,
sometimes painted.[931] Although earlier than any other pottery in
Attica, it need not be pre-Mycenaean in date; it seems more likely to
be a _contemporary survival_. Early wares have also been found in the
islands, as in Aegina, with Geometrical ornament in _matt_-colour; nor
must we forget that the Geometrical principle was known in Cyprus and
the Cyclades, as also at Hissarlik, at a very remote age. From these
data Dr. Wide has ingeniously drawn the conclusion that the Geometrical
style was always indigenous in Greece,[932] pointing out that it was
more likely and more in accordance with historical precedent that the
Dorians, like Rome in later days, accepted the art of the people they
conquered[933] than that they introduced their own and forced it upon
the subjugated race. This theory has the additional merit of disposing
of a difficulty which had always been felt. If the Geometrical pottery
was Dorian, how do we account for its reaching its height in Attica,
which was never at any time Doric, or influenced by Doric
characteristics? But if it can be shown to be indigenous in Attica, the
difficulty disappears.

Again, it is necessary to explain the varying character of Geometrical
pottery in different parts of Greece, as compared with the homogeneity
of the Mycenaean wares. If, as was supposed, the Geometrical style came
full-grown into Greece, why should this be? Dr. Wide therefore
maintains that there were in Greece _concurrently_ a _Bauernstil_ or
domestic art, aboriginal and industrial, which produced the rude
geometrical fabrics, and a _Herrenstil_ or _art de luxe_, exotic and
ornamental, which we know as Mycenaean. With the upheaval and
dispersion of the Achaean aristocracy this art practically died out,
but the humbler industry held its ground, and gradually forged its way
to comparative excellence, perhaps learning much from Mycenaean
technique.

The real novelty of the developed Geometrical pottery which now
manifests itself in Greece consists in its evolution _as a style_, and
the combination of the patterns into an artistic system, with a
continuous progress towards symmetry and rhythm. Geometrical patterns
are indeed the property of all primitive peoples, and are no less
spontaneous and universal in their origin than the folk-lore stories
which we find adopting the same or similar forms in all parts of the
world. In Greece, no doubt, the cultured traditions of Mycenaean art
had in course of time their due effect, and both in technique and in
ornament left their impress on the inferior fabrics,[934] as we have
seen to have been the case, especially in the Greek islands. It is an
influence which is not confined to the pottery, but made itself felt,
for instance, in architecture. It can hardly be doubted that in the
Lion Gate of Mycenae we find the prototype of the Doric column; and the
parallel with the Geometrical pottery can be further followed up when
we consider that Doric architecture also became the common property of
Continental Greece, and also realised its highest perfection at Athens.

The Geometrical pottery has been found in great numbers in Attica and
Boeotia, in the islands of Aegina, Melos, Thera, Rhodes, and
Crete,[935] in Argolis and Laconia, in Sicily and Etruria, and also
isolated specimens in Cyprus and the Troad.[936] That found in Italy
and Cyprus is certainly exported from the mainland. It has been
observed that each region has its own peculiar variety of the style,
and this is especially conspicuous in the examples from Attica and
Boeotia.[937] The first writer who attempted to deal with it
scientifically was Conze,[938] but owing to its clearly-defined
characteristics it has always been more or less correctly treated by
the older schools of archaeologists. But with a more extended outlook
over the fabrics of early Hellas, many problems have arisen in
connection with it which have called for more recent discussion, and
the writings of Kroker, Böhlau, and Wide in particular should be
studied.[939]

At Mycenae fragments of Geometrical pottery were found both on the
surface and in the palace, among the débris of the huts built on its
site; while in the island of Salamis there is a cemetery of distinctly
transitional character, containing false amphorae with linear
decoration and combinations of the spiral with the maeander.[940] It
may be noted that a similar transitional cemetery was found by Mr.
Paton at Assarlik in Caria,[941] and that the “sub-Mycenaean” pottery
of Cyprus (p. 246) has been shown to exhibit the same combination of
features. These facts fall into line with what has already been said as
to the survival of Mycenaean art in these fabrics.

From the fact that large quantities of this ware have been obtained
from the tombs of the Kerameikos near the Dipylon Gate of Athens,
chiefly between 1870 and 1891, it has frequently been styled _Dipylon
ware_; but it is questionable whether this title should not be reserved
for varieties peculiar to this site. These Dipylon tombs were in the
form of deep quadrangular trenches, and the bodies had been sometimes
inhumed, sometimes cremated, the bones being placed in vessels of
bronze or clay, containing smaller objects. Above the trenches was a
layer of earth mixed with burnt offerings, on the top of which,
_outside the tombs_, were placed the large painted vases (representing
the tombstones or stone sepulchral vases of later times) which now form
a prominent part of the collections at Athens and in the Louvre.[942]

                  *       *       *       *       *

Turning to treat of their general characteristics, we note that the
vases are all wheel-made, of a carefully-prepared red clay covered with
a lustrous and impermeable yellow slip, on which the designs are
painted in the same lustrous black as the Mycenaean wares. Later, but
rarely, white is introduced as an accessory. As regards the shapes,
there is less variety than in Mycenaean pottery. They include the
typical forms of Dipylon vases, a large wide-mouthed _krater_ on a high
stem, and an _amphora_ with cylindrical neck and side-handles; also the
_lebes_, the cylindrical jug or _olpe_, the wide bowl or _skyphos_, and
the _pyxis_ or covered jar. Open-work stands for vases are often found
in the Cyclades.[943] On the covers of the _pyxides_ a group of two or
three rudely-modelled horses sometimes forms the handle. In considering
the forms generally, it is permissible to say that the potter of the
day was in advance of his Mycenaean predecessor, although the painter
was not.

The decoration follows a development which permits of the division of
Geometrical vases into three periods, in which we follow Kroker[944]:
(1) for a long time it is exclusively limited to Geometrical patterns,
and (2) even when quadrupeds and birds are introduced they are still
only decorative (as in Boeotia); (3) finally, while the animals take a
subsidiary place, human figures and large compositions spring into
prominence. But this final development is chiefly characteristic of
Athens. Wide distinguishes four varieties of the Dipylon ware: (_a_)
amphorae, with black varnished bodies and designs only on the neck;
(_b_) “black Dipylon ware,” mainly varnished, but more decorated than
(_a_); (_c_) large vases, with linear decoration or figures all over in
horizontal friezes (the tomb-amphorae); (_d_) as the last, but with
vertical panels, divided like metopes. His view is that these represent
a continuous development, but that the style did not last long in
Attica. Returning to Kroker’s classification, it must be borne in mind
that the three classes are not successive in point of _time_, only in
artistic development; the plain linear decoration survived throughout,
and is often found in tombs contemporaneously with the figure subjects.

The patterns are mainly, though not exclusively, rectilinear, and
sometimes extremely elaborate. The favourite are a large bold maeander,
chevrons, chequers, and arrangements of hatched lines; also squares,
with diagonals and much ground-ornament. Among the simpler motives are
lines of dots, triangles, lozenges, and various forms of crosses; but
concentric and “tangent” circles occur not infrequently, the latter
being clearly derived from the Mycenaean spiral, and one vegetable
motive appears in the form of a conventionalised leaf, later developed
into a rosette. M. Perrot[945] gives a very instructive diagram of the
typical scheme of ornamentation on the neck and body of a vase,
including most of the principal varieties. It should also be noted that
these patterns occur frequently on the field of the designs as
ground-ornaments, to cover the vacant spaces.

In the arrangement of the patterns an architectural instinct is clearly
at work, the influence of the Doric metope being especially prominent.
They are usually arranged, as the diagram (Fig. 83) shows, in
horizontal bands round the neck and body, like the bands of painted
ornament on the entablature of a temple. The metopes and triglyphs are
represented by large square patterns of ornament, separated by narrow
vertical strips of simpler motives (cf. Fig. 84). The introduction of
the frieze principle proper is a later development. Generally speaking,
there is an invariable tendency towards symmetry and refinement in the
arrangement. When figure subjects begin to be introduced, it betokens a
great advance in decorative art, especially over the Cypriote and other
varieties of the style. In the tendency to a _horror vacui_, the style
is inferior to Mycenaean, as also in the figure-drawing, of which more
anon. The absence of any plant-ornament is most characteristic, as
showing the great change from the Mycenaean spirit; but it was not long
before this element was destined to reappear and virtually usurp the
field of decoration.[946]

[Illustration:

  From _Perrot’s Hist. de l’Art_.
  FIG. 83. SCHEME OF ORNAMENTATION ON GEOMETRICAL VASES.
]

In regard to its ornamentation the Geometrical style may be said to
have attained success. It is not so, however, with its representations
of living form, least of all those of human beings. But this is only in
accordance with the principle which M. Pottier styles the _hierarchie
des genres_, a principle which is universal in all early development of
Greek art, and to which we have already referred (p. 245: see also p.
315). Briefly it is this: first, the predominance of pure _ornament_
and the perfecting of the same; secondly, the employment of _animal_
forms and the relegation of ornament to a subsidiary place; thirdly and
lastly, the rise and development of _human_ forms, the other animals
ceasing to form the main theme of decoration, and sinking to the level
of mere decorative adjuncts.

[Illustration: FIG. 84. GEOMETRICAL VASE WITH PANELS (BRIT. MUS.).]

Hence we find that figures of animals when first introduced on
Geometrical vases are of a conventional and ill-drawn character, but
show a gradual progress and development. Human forms again, which now
appear for the first time, are only seen in a very rude and undeveloped
stage, from which there is continuous development throughout the
archaic period till perfection is reached in the fifth century. Their
original extreme conventionality may be the result of a training in
Egyptian canons of art.

The favourite animal motives are the horse, the deer, and water-fowl.
The first also appears in a plastic form, surmounting the covers of
vases and forming a sort of handle. Usually a single animal is seen in
a metope-like panel (cf. Fig. 84), and the frieze system is seldom
found at this period. A curious conception is that of a lion or wolf
devouring a man, whose legs are seen protruding from its mouth, and
this appears to have been adopted by the Etruscans, on whose archaic
bronze-work and bucchero vases it sometimes occurs.[947] The lions on
the Geometrical vases, it may be noted in passing, are obviously drawn
without knowledge, and borrowed from Asiatic art; the same conventional
type obtains at a later date, as in the Burgon lebes (below, p. 296).

Human figures are almost confined to the large vases from the Dipylon
cemetery, which are evidently a purely local product; almost the only
exceptions are two from Boeotia (see below, p. 288), and one from
Rhodes in the British Museum (A 439). The infantile and barbarous style
of the figures recalls in a measure the primitive marble idols from the
Cyclades; there is seldom any actual distinction of sex, the narrow
waist, wide hips, and tapering limbs being apparently common to both.
The figures being painted in plain silhouette, there is no attempt at
rendering features. Where it is intended to represent a warrior, the
body is completely hidden behind a shield of the Boeotian type
[Boeotian shield], a ready resource of the artist for avoiding
anatomical difficulties, which was also adopted later by his
seventh-century Corinthian successors, except that in the latter case
the shield is circular.

The subjects include battles and naval scenes, dances of women hand in
hand, and funeral processions. From the combination of ships with
funeral scenes, it would seem that they were sometimes used for
carrying the dead. A remarkable lebes recently acquired by the British
Museum[948] is decorated with a large ship-of-war with two banks of
rowers (bireme), and appears to represent a warrior landing therefrom
on shore.[949] The funeral scenes on the great Dipylon vases are
exceedingly elaborate, and exhibit a corpse drawn on a bier,
accompanied by chariots and bands of mourning women beating their
heads.[950] By a conventional attempt at perspective the figures are
often placed above the central group when they are supposed to be on
its farther side, just as, in the fresco from Tiryns, and an
“Island-gem” of the Mycenaean period, a man leading a bull is
represented over its back.[951]

Two very interesting specimens of Geometrical fabrics are in the
museum at Kopenhagen,[952] late indeed and almost transitional in
character, but still typical. One is a deep two-handled cup or bowl
with long panels on either side, in two tiers; the upper ones are
filled with ornaments and animals, and in the lower are several
subjects—combatants, lyre-players, a dance of armed men with shield
and spear, two lions devouring a man (see above), and men with jugs
and lustral branches preparing for some religious rite. The other is
a jug, with very little ornamentation except on the background of the
designs, which also include several subjects. On the neck is a man
holding horses; on the shoulder, dogs pursuing a hare; and on the
body, combats on land and sea.

In the range of subjects a general correspondence with epic poetry is
to be noted,[953] as in the funerals and combats; but there are some
important discrepancies, such as the _quadriga_ in place of the Homeric
_biga_, the types of the ships, and in the appearance of horsemen,
which are of course unknown to Homer.[954]

The Geometrical vases found in Boeotia form an important and distinct
local variety, which calls for separate treatment. The existence of
this local style was first suspected by Furtwaengler in 1878 on seeing
the first finds made at Thebes, and it has since been studied with
great care and detail by Böhlau.[955] Among these finds were, in
addition to the recognised local pottery, ordinary (imported) Dipylon
vases, and later Proto-Corinthian and Corinthian wares, as well as
bronze fibulae and terracotta figures, to which subsequent reference
must be made. Similar pottery was also found in large numbers on the
site of the temple of Apollo at Mount Ptoös in 1885–91, and other
examples have turned up at Tanagra. It has been suggested, though on
somewhat slight grounds, that Aulis was the centre of the local fabric;
and, further, it was supposed by Böhlau, who is supported by
Perrot,[956] that the Boeotian wares represent a primitive phase of the
Geometrical pottery, anterior to the Dipylon, and consequently that
Boeotia is the original home of the style as a whole. But in view of
what has been said above, and generally of the relation of the Boeotian
pottery to the Dipylon, and to the later Proto-Corinthian, it seems
doubtful if this view can be maintained. Moreover, it has been pointed
out by M. Holleaux,[957] in discussing the Ptoös finds, that the pure
Geometrical vases were found at a lower level than the typical local
wares, and were never found either with them or with the analogous
terracotta figures. This certainly points to the later origin of the
Boeotian pottery.

The local clay differs from that of Athens both in nature and
appearance, being less well levigated and of a reddish-yellow colour,
as compared with the warm brown of the Dipylon. Further, the designs
are not laid directly on the clay, as in the latter, but on a thin
creamy-yellow slip, as in Mycenaean and Ionian pottery. The technique
is, generally speaking, inferior, as is also the black pigment used;
the work is rough and hasty, the drawing careless and inaccurate.

The vases are mostly small, at least compared with those of the
Dipylon, and the favourite shape is the _kylix_, with or without a
stem. Out of seventy-two examples given by Böhlau, no less than
fifty-five take this form. He traces its development from a deep bowl
with “base-ring,” which seems to be related to the Cypriote white-slip
one-handled bowls; but the Boeotian type has at first two small
finger-pieces in place of handles, afterwards replaced by a single
handle for hanging up. The majority, however, have no less than four
handles, and that they were still intended for suspension is shown by
the method of decoration which can only be properly seen in this
position (cf. Fig. 85).

[Illustration:

  From _Jahrbuch_.
  FIG. 85. BOEOTIAN GEOMETRICAL VASES (BERLIN MUSEUM).
]

There is a wearisome uniformity in the patterns, and indeed in the
decoration generally. Only two examples are known from Boeotia with
human figures,[958] and the rest belong to the intermediate class, with
its combination of animals and decorative patterns. On the exterior is
usually a broad frieze, divided by bands of ornament into four or five
fields, in which are birds or palmette patterns; these panels are not
necessarily arranged with reference to the position of the handles. The
patterns comprise rows of vertical zigzags, dotted lozenges, chevrons,
latticed triangles, rosettes, and scrolls, the first-named being
specially characteristic of Boeotia. It is to be noted that the typical
Athenian motives, the maeander and the ornamented square, do not occur;
in fact, these bowls have no analogies in the Dipylon ware. But it is
also interesting to observe the appearance of a new vegetable element
in the form of friezes of palmettes and lotos-flowers.[959] The
importance of this feature is due to the extensive part it was destined
to play in the ornamentation of Greek vases all through the sixth
century. Some of the palmettes are remarkably advanced, and the whole
pattern is even emancipated from the confinement of the frieze, and
treated freely without regard to space.[960] Böhlau, in his analysis of
the ornament as a whole, notes its independence of the Athenian vases,
though remaining a parallel and closely-related development.

Individual vases do not call for much comment, but there is a curious
coffer of terracotta from Thebes in Berlin (Fig. 86),[961] painted with
figures in this style. The subjects include the Asiatic Artemis, a
hare-hunt, a woman leading a horse, a horse tied up, and two serpents
erect, confronted. The ground is filled in with rosettes, crosses, and
other ornaments, such as the so-called _swastika_.

[Illustration:

  From _Jahrbuch_.
  FIG. 86. COFFER FROM THEBES: BOEOTIAN GEOMETRICAL STYLE
  (BERLIN MUSEUM).
]

While on the subject of the Boeotian vases it is worth while to call
attention to the remarkable parallels presented by two other classes of
objects also found in that region: bronze fibulae and terracotta
statuettes. The former may be regarded as important chronological
evidence, inasmuch as their development can be clearly traced from
their first appearance at the end of the Mycenaean period (about the
tenth century), and similar types have been found in Rhodes, at
Olympia, and elsewhere. The characteristic of the Boeotian fibulae is
the flat plate which forms the foot (in some cases the central part or
bow), and is generally of a quadrangular form, decorated with an
engraved subject, usually animals or birds of a similar type to those
painted in the panels on the vases. More rarely ships or human figures
are found.[962]

The terracotta figures (p. 123), on the other hand, bear a different
relation to the pottery. They are flat board-like figures (sa??de?),
known to the modern Greek digger as “Pappades,” the high head-dress
which they wear suggesting to him the well-known hat of the orthodox
“Papas” or priest. The flat surface of the body gives scope for
ornamentation representing embroidered robes,[963] and the patterns
employed are just those which are seen on the vases; and, moreover, the
method of painting is the same, the figures being covered with a buff
slip, the patterns in black with purple details. It should be remarked
that some of these figures are comparatively developed in style,[964]
and that they are practically _later imitations_ of the decoration of
the vases.

                  *       *       *       *       *

In considering the Geometrical vases as a whole, we are struck with the
laudable aspirations of the artist, who, though unable to execute his
new ambitions with complete success, yet shows in his work the same
promise of the future that is latent in all early Greek art. His best
achievement is in the ornamentation. Oriental influences as yet count
for very little, though they are perhaps to be discerned in the human
figures, as already noted; Kroker also thinks that the nude female
figures on the larger vases are due to Oriental art.[965] In any case
they are not to be traced until late in the period, and first, as might
be expected for geographical reasons, in the fabrics found at Kameiros
in Rhodes.

The question of chronology must next be considered. That the developed
Geometrical style succeeds to the Mycenaean, and forms a link between
it and the early Attic attempts at black-figured ware, of which we
shall subsequently treat, is sufficiently clear. It may also be laid
down that the Dipylon ware represents the last stage of Geometrical
decoration, being in point of fact too far advanced to be regarded as a
purely typical Geometrical ware. Such data as the finding of iron in
the tombs, or the evidence of finds at Troy,[966] also tend to place
the beginning of the style at least as early as the tenth century. It
has also been noted that the figures correspond closely with the
bronzes of Olympia which are dated about the ninth century, and this,
if accepted, necessitates placing the simpler linear decoration back as
far as the tenth. The lower limits of the style may be roughly fixed by
the evidence from the tombs of Etruria, discussed in Chapter XVIII., at
about 700 B.C.

Next, there is the evidence afforded by the ships,[967] which it should
be noted are all of the bireme or d????? form, with two banks of oars.
The invention of the trireme, as we learn from Thucydides (i. 13, 5),
was due to Ameinokles, about the year 704 B.C. Hence Kroker’s dating of
the Dipylon vases about the year 700 can hardly be accepted. But the
eighth century may be taken as representing the latest period of the
Geometrical pottery, both in Attica and Boeotia. The curious
inscription engraved on a Dipylon vase from Athens is dealt with
elsewhere (Chapter XVII.); undoubtedly the earliest known Attic
inscription, its value as evidence is limited to that of a _terminus
ante quem_, from the fact that it was probably engraved at a subsequent
time to the manufacture of the vase.

The question of centres of manufacture is one that has already been the
subject of some discussion,[968] the result of which has been to show
that there is no complete homogeneity in the wares from different
sites, and consequently no one central fabric. The colossal funerary
vases, which, it may be remarked in passing, stand at the head of a
long line of funerary fabrics and show the Athenian fondness for this
class of vase,[969] were not, and could not have been, generally
exported, in spite of the notable exception at Curium. The ordinary
wares might have been made in some one place (probably a Dorian centre,
not Attica or Boeotia); but we have seen that most finds, as in Rhodes,
present local peculiarities.[970] Athens at this period was not
sufficiently advanced to become the centre of large potteries, and did
not become so, as we shall see, before the age of the Peisistratidae;
such vases as were made were strictly confined to special purposes. It
is a curious fact that very little Geometrical ware was found on the
Acropolis.

The Geometrical pottery of Cyprus has already been discussed in its
relation to that of Greece (pp. 249, 253)[971]; but there is yet
another region which passed through a Geometrical period similar to
that of Greece, and that is Etruria (see Chapter XVIII.). It is,
however, better illustrated by the metal products of the Villanova
period, such as the bronze discs and large cinerary urns, than by the
local pottery, which never reached the same level as in Greece; in the
former the same combinations of elaborate ornament with rude animals
and yet ruder human figures may be witnessed, and it is possible that
importations from Greece may have had a share in influencing these
products. They cover the period from the tenth to the eighth century
B.C.

                    § 2. ATTICA, BOEOTIA, AND MELOS

Following on to the Geometrical vases both in chronological and
artistic sequence is a small class of Athenian vases, which, more for
convenience than with regard to strict accuracy, have been styled
=Proto-Attic=. The term has this much of truth in it, that the group
may be said to stand at the head of, and in direct relation to, the
long series of painted vases produced in the Athenian potteries for
some two centuries afterwards. It is only of late years that a
sufficient number of these vases has become known for them to be
studied as a separate class, and even when Böhlau first drew attention
to them, in 1887, only two or three were known. The list up to date is
as follows (the order being roughly chronological):—

  1. Athens 467

     (_Couve’s       Amphora    Kerameikos   _Ath. Mitth._ 1892, pl.
     Cat._)                                  10.

  2. Berlin 56       Amphora    Hymettos     _Jahrbuch_, 1887, pl. 5.

  3. Athens 468      Hydria     Analatos     _ibid._ pls. 3, 4.
                                (Phaleron)

  4. Athens 464      Lebes      Thebes       _ibid._ pl. 4.

  5. Athens 469      Amphora    Pikrodaphni  _Bull. de Corr. Hell._
                                             1893, pls. 2, 3.

  6. Athens Mus.     Amphora    Kynosarges   _J.H.S._ xxii. pls. 2–4.

  7. Athens 650      Fragment   Aegina       Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic._
                                             _Vasenb._ pl. 54.

  8. Athens 657      Amphora    Kerameikos   _Ant. Denkm._ i. pl. 57.

  9. Athens 651      Amphora    Peiraeus     ?f. ???. 1897, pl. 5.

 10. Berlin 1682     Lebes      Aegina       _Arch. Zeit._ 1882, pls.
                                             9, 10.

 11. B.M. A 535      Lebes      Athens       Rayet and Collignon, p.
                                             43 = Fig. 87.

  We may also add to this list Athens 652–664, a vase from Aegina
  (_Ath. Mitth._ 1897, pl. 8), B.M. A 1531 (_Bull. de Corr. Hell._
  1898, p. 285), and another at Athens (_ibid._ p. 283).

It will be noticed that the majority are of the amphora form, and that
all without exception have been found in or near Athens, which leaves
little room for doubt as to their origin.

A close connection with the Dipylon vases may be observed in the first
three, not only in shape and technique, but in decoration. In No. 2,
which we may take as typical of the oldest form of the Attic amphora, a
combination of Geometrical and Mycenaean ornament is to be observed,
but the figures of the warriors are purely Hellenic, like those of the
Euphorbos pinax (p. 335). The shape of No. 3 is typical of the
Geometrical vases, with its long neck and slim body, and it is perhaps
more accurately called a three-handled jug than a hydria, though at the
same time it is clearly the prototype of the later Attic hydria. The
panel on the neck of the vase (also seen in No. 6) is also a
Geometrical feature, and the figures therein are quite in the Dipylon
style. On the other hand, in the arrangement of the designs in
continuous friezes without vertical divisions we trace the incoming
influence of a foreign style—the Rhodian or Ionian. Other motives
again, such as the birds and the vegetable ornaments, have nothing of
the Geometrical or Ionian about them, and may perhaps be directly
derived from Mycenaean vases. But the typically Geometrical lozenges,
zigzags, etc., still hold their own. In No. 6 Mr. Cecil Smith notes
that the ornamentation covering the field of the design is partly
rectilinear and geometrical, partly floral and of Mycenaean origin. The
spiral pattern which here closes the design, and is also seen on No. 1,
is again an instance of Mycenaean influence, and is a motive which
became exceedingly popular. In another seventh-century class, the
so-called Melian vases, it is absolutely overdone, but the more
restrained Attic tradition is preserved for many years as an
appropriate decoration for the division of the designs under the
handles, especially in the red-bodied amphorae of the developed B.F.
style. This vase has some other unusual features, such as incised
lines, which are also found on some early Attic fragments from the
Acropolis,[972] but seem to appear equally early at Corinth, so that it
is impossible to say certainly if the process is an Attic invention. At
all events it is not Ionian, as its place is taken on the east of the
Aegean by lines of white paint (_e.g._ in the Clazomenae sarcophagi).
Curiously enough, in this same vase (No. 6) may be noted attempts at
this very process, here, no doubt, as on the Ionian vases, due to
Mycenaean influence (see p. 331); but it is unique in early Attic
work.[973] The peculiar treatment of the eye and hair is also worthy of
attention.

To sum up the characteristics of the Proto-Attic vases, it may be said
that they represent the transformation of the Attico-Dorian element
into the Attico-Ionian, just as we shall see in the next stage a
further transformation under new influences into Attico-Corinthian (p.
324). The Ionian influence brings with it into Attica not only a
revival of Mycenaean elements, but also traces of Orientalism.[974] The
general appearance of the decoration links it with the Geometrical, but
closer examination shows the admixture of spirals, rosettes, and
lotos-flowers with the lozenges and zigzags, while the Geometrical
animal-types are combined with new ones from Ionia, such as the lion,
and the funeral scenes and combats are supplanted by Centaurs and
winged genii of Assyrian character.[975] Further, there is a distinct
tendency to get rid of the old silhouette and to draw in outline, a
practice typical of Ionia and a direct heritage from Mycenaean
vase-paintings. As in the Rhodian vases, the bodies are rendered in
full colour, the heads in outline; while the practice of covering the
field with ground-ornaments is also a peculiarly Rhodian
characteristic. These latter, however, gradually disappear, as do the
Geometrical conventions in the drawing of the figures.

The amphora-type develops steadily onwards from the Berlin Hymettos
amphora, which, as has been pointed out, is the oldest Attic variety.
In some of the forms, as in No. 5, there are traces of a metallic
origin, shown by the open-work handles and other details.[976]
Generally speaking, there is a tendency towards the colossal, and
towards emphasising the figure-decoration, not only by increasing the
size of the figures, but by confining the subject to one side. M.
Pottier thinks that this is due to architectural influences, and
suggests a comparison with a temple-façade. But the local traditions
are still strong, and in spite of the influence of the lively and
original Ionic style, the vases remain “continental” at bottom, the
drawing always soberer and more powerful throughout. In many respects
there is, as we shall see, a close parallelism with the so-called
Melian fabrics.

No. 11, the large Burgon lebes in the British Museum (Fig. 87), is one
of the latest representatives of the Proto-Attic class; its
Ionic-looking lions and “Rhodian” wealth of ground-ornaments seem to
suggest Asiatic influences, the presence of which has been accounted
for above. Moreover, the loop-pattern on the reverse is distinctly
Proto-Attic, and finds its parallels on vases found at Eretria,[977] as
well as on others of the class under consideration.

[Illustration: FIG. 87. BURGON LEBES (BRITISH MUSEUM).]

Another interesting point in connection with the Proto-Attic vases is
the introduction of mythological subjects, as on No. 6 (Herakles and
Antaios), No. 8 (Herakles and the Centaur Nessos), No. 10 (Perseus and
Athena, and a Harpy[978]). The only parallel to this early appearance
of myths on vases is to be found in the Melian class (see below, p.
301), the Aristonoös krater (see below) and the Euphorbos pinax (p.
335), which, however, is of later date. It will be seen that they only
occur in the later group of the Attic vases.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                               PLATE XVI

[Illustration:

  From _Wiener Vorl._
  THE ARISTONOÖS KRATER (IN THE VATICAN).
]

                  ------------------------------------

On two of these it is to be noted that inscriptions occur, identifying
the figures (Nos. 8 and 10). These are the oldest painted inscriptions
on Attic vases, but henceforward they increase in number, at least in
the Athenian and Corinthian fabrics; they are always more
characteristic of the mainland than of Asia Minor.[979] There are two
early signed vases which may possibly represent the work of Athenian
artists prior to the time of the François vase, the cup by Oikopheles
at Oxford,[980] and the famous vase of Aristonophos,[981] Ariston of
Kos (? ????), Aristonothos, or Aristonoös as various scholars interpret
the name.[982] The former, however, is somewhat archaistic in
character, with careless rather than incompetent drawing, and hardly
earlier than the sixth century; and the latter has been claimed with
much probability as Ionian work, on account of the treatment of certain
details, as well as on the ground of the name Ariston of Kos (if this
interpretation be accepted). The inscription is not conclusive either
way, and it may also be here remarked that the krater has several
points of resemblance with the well-known “Warrior” vase of Mycenae
(Fig. 88),[983] which is probably later in date than the rest of the
pottery from that site, being found outside the Acropolis. The
Aristonoös vase (Plate XVI.) is usually dated in the seventh century,
and is interesting for its subjects as well as for its artistic
position. On one side is a sea-fight, a subject only common on Greek
vases in the Geometrical period, and therefore obviously derived from
that source; on the other, the blinding of Polyphemos by Odysseus, a
subject popular in archaic vase-painting (see Chapter XIV.), and found
in Cyrenaic and other early examples. At first sight this vase would
certainly seem to be of the Proto-Attic class, showing the transition
from Geometrical to developed Attic style; but the Mycenaean and Ionian
elements must not be left out of consideration. As regards the Warrior
vase, M. Pottier has given good grounds for showing that it also is to
be reckoned as Proto-Attic. But we must not leave out of sight the view
urged by Furtwaengler,[984] that the Aristonoös vase is of an Argive
fabric. When the Heraion finds are published, they may afford more
evidence on this point. Meanwhile, it may be remarked that the
circumstances of the finding of the Warrior vase may support this view.

[Illustration: FIG. 88. VASE FROM MYCENAE, WITH WARRIORS.]

Closely connected with these early Attic fabrics is a very interesting
series of small vases which, from the place of their discovery, are
usually known as =Phaleron ware=. They are nearly all small jugs, and
number some fifty, mostly at Athens, but there is a representative
series in the British Museum. More conspicuously, perhaps, than the
Proto-Attic, they illustrate the growing tendency to combine
Geometrical and Oriental influences. In form and technique they are
Geometrical, but in the ornamentation there is a large admixture of
Oriental elements. It has been said that “the whole character of these
vases seems to reflect an influence of the style of Oriental vases on
painters accustomed to the Dipylon style,”[985] and it is largely in
the arrangement of the decoration that the former is apparent, as well
as in the introduction of new motives and patterns.[986] See for
examples Plate XVII. figs. 2, 4, 5.

[Illustration:

  From _Ath. Mitth._ 1890.

  FIG. 89. VASE OF PROTO-ATTIC
  TYPE FROM VOURVA.
]

The usual scheme consists of a panel with figures on the neck, a band
of ornament round the shoulder, and below that parallel bands of lines
or other ornaments, with zigzags or rays round the foot. A typical
example is A 471 in the British Museum, with a cock on the neck, and
below, dogs pursuing a hare.[987] On a cup of Geometrical form, with
conventionalised plants and ground-ornaments of Geometrical character,
are two deer fleeing from a lion, and there is also a pyxis with
chariot-scenes obviously derived from Mycenaean vases. But most curious
and interesting is a jug with two bearded heads and a woman with very
small body, apparently playing flutes.[988] The general effect is quite
unique, but the drawing is rude and childish to a degree; the middle
head is almost Semitic in type. It would seem that here again we have a
Mycenaean influence at work, and in general the appearance and style of
these vases undoubtedly recall the figured vases from Cyprus.[989]

Another series of vases in close relation to the Proto-Attic fabrics is
that found at Vourva, near Marathon[990]; they are important as forming
a connecting link with the next development of Attic vase-painting, the
Tyrrhenian amphorae described at the conclusion of this chapter. They
have been studied by Böhlau,[991] and more recently by Nilsson,[992]
and these writers have shown how they represent the influence of Ionic
ideas, derived through Euboea. On the other hand the friezes of
animals, which are so characteristic of this class, are clearly derived
from Corinthian sources, but are distinguished from those on Corinthian
vases by the absence of accessory colours. Fig. 89[993] may be taken as
a typical example. They appear to be contemporary with the later
Proto-Attic vases, such as the Burgon lebes, on which also traces of
Ionic influence have been noted.

                  *       *       *       *       *

From the Geometrical period onwards the manufacture of painted vases
seems to have been continued intermittently in =Boeotia= down to the
fourth century. It would be taking too great a liberty with chronology
to deal with all Boeotian fabrics here, and the later must fall into
their place with the contemporary Attic fabrics. But there is a small
class which seems to take its origin directly or indirectly from the
Geometrical pottery; and as it belongs to a period anterior to the
perfected B.F. style, it may be treated here as analogous in
development to the Proto-Attic vases.

A favourite shape among the Boeotian Geometrical wares was that of a
jug with long cylindrical neck and somewhat flat body, of a form
clearly imitated from metal.[994] This shape, which is also often found
in Proto-Corinthian fabrics (see below, p. 308), was utilised by a
potter named Gamedes, whose signature is found on a vase from Tanagra
in the Louvre,[995] in the Boeotian alphabet of about 600 B.C. It is
decorated with the figure of a herdsman driving before him a bull and a
flock of sheep, the figures being in black silhouette, with details
indicated by white markings within incised lines. This is quite a local
peculiarity,[996] and seems to be due to a combination of Corinthian
and Ionian influences. Gamedes has also signed his name on an unpainted
aryballos of the typical early Corinthian globular form (see p. 197) in
the British Museum (Plate XVII. fig. 6), and a similar vase in the
Louvre is signed by Menaidas.[997] Yet another Boeotian potter,
Theozotos, has a signed vase with a similar subject to the Gamedes jug,
but the style is more advanced.[998]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                              PLATE XVII

[Illustration:

  EARLY POTTERY FROM GREECE (BRITISH MUSEUM).

  1, 3, “PROTO-CORINTHIAN”; 2, 4, 5, “PHALERON” WARE; 6, BOEOTIAN,
    SIGNED BY GAMEDES.
]

                  ------------------------------------

Another typically Boeotian form found in the same period is a
kantharos,[999] also obviously imitated from metal and decorated with
figures of animals or palmette-and-lotos patterns of a peculiarly local
type. The style of the animals is, like that of the Gamedes vase, also
peculiar and local; but both in decoration and technique these vases
seem to reflect Corinthian influence.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A small but remarkable class of vases, which seem to stand almost by
themselves, is that known as the =Melian amphorae=. Four vases of this
type now in the Athens Museum[1000] were found in Melos many years ago,
and were recognised as a separate class and described as “Melian vases”
as long ago as 1862 by Conze.[1001] Since that time a splendid example
has been added to the list, found in the same island in 1893[1002]; and
to this must be added several fragments recognised at different times,
including one from Naukratis in the British Museum.[1003] All the
complete vases are large amphorae, about three feet high, but of
elegant proportions, with two handles branching out low down on the
body. The figures are painted in brown on a pale yellow ground, and
enhanced with dull red and purple accessories, some of the details also
being incised. In two cases the subjects are mythological, one
representing Apollo with his lyre in a chariot accompanied by Artemis
and two Muses[1004]; another the Asiatic Artemis (see Chapter
XII.)[1005]; another, the one found in 1893, has the subjects of Hermes
and Athena, and Herakles carrying off Iole. Deities in chariots are a
typical Melian subject. The figures are of quite original design, in no
way imitative, and the costumes seem to indicate a period between Homer
and the sixth century. They may be roughly dated about the middle of
the seventh.

They exhibit a combination of highly-developed Geometrical ornament
with vegetable motives from the East and Mycenaean details, such as the
spiral, which, as has already been noted (p. 294), attains almost to a
rank growth over the vacant spaces of the vases. The human forms are
conceived with a remarkable degree of freedom. In general appearance
they are not unlike the large Proto-Attic amphorae, but much richer and
freer in style; they may be also said to approach the finer Naukratite
or Rhodian vases, such as the Euphorbos pinax with its quasi-Homeric
subject and lavish use of ornament.[1006]

The decoration is more advanced than that of the Proto-Attic class, the
palmettes, for instance, being more freely treated. Riegl[1007] notes
that the palmettes and lotos-flowers are derived from Egypt, but
transformed and Hellenised, and that the spirals are not Geometrical,
but are naturalised into plants. The characteristic arrangement of the
ornament in long vertical stripes he traces from Egypt through
Mycenaean art; it develops later into the plait-band of the Clazomenae
sarcophagi (Plate XXVII.). In brief, the ornament of the Melian vases
forms a direct link between Mycenaean and Hellenic ornament.

An altogether new light has been thrown on this group by a large series
of fragments of painted pottery found in 1898 in the island of Rheneia,
which undoubtedly form part of the contents of graves brought over from
Delos in 426–25 B.C., as recorded by Thucydides (iii. 104). They have
been recently made the subject of careful study by Mr. J. H.
Hopkinson,[1008] who recognised them as belonging to the Melian class,
and identified parts of at least ten distinct vases. The scanty
preservation of fragments of complete vases is, in his opinion, due to
the fact that they had been originally placed outside the tombs like
the Dipylon vases. Like the complete examples, they are characterised
by their fine slip and brilliant polychrome technique, the system of
frieze-decoration with Geometric ornaments and spirals, the free and
spirited drawing, and their purely plastic forms, showing no signs of
imitation of metal. They also bear out the isolated character of this
fabric, in which all the vases seem to be on the same level of
excellence, without any signs of transition at either end.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                             PLATE XVIII

[Illustration: MELIAN AMPHORA (ATHENS MUSEUM).]

                  ------------------------------------

Mr. Hopkinson draws the conclusion, in which he may prove to be
justified, that this pottery is of Delian manufacture, but if so, that
the clay must have been imported, as the local clay is, and always has
been, too poor in character. At all events, the Cycladic origin of the
fabric can hardly be a matter of doubt, and it is clear that the
intermediate position of these islands would account for a combination
of Geometrical and Ionian elements, so far as such exists. But the
strongly individualistic character of the vases compels us to seek some
other influence for their real origin, and it seems on the whole
probable that they represent a separate and independent descent from
Mycenaean pottery, starting with the spiral as the basis of
ornamentation. Some evidence of this descent may be traced in the
native pottery of Phylakopi, to which allusion has been made in the
previous chapter (p. 263).[1009]

                              § 3. CORINTH

                              BIBLIOGRAPHY

    Wilisch, _Altkorinthische Thonindustrie_ (1892); Pottier, _Louvre
      Cat._ ii. p. 417 ff.; Dumont-Pottier, _Céramiques_, i. chaps. xi.
      and xvi.; Rayet and Collignon, p. 39 ff. For “Proto-Corinthian”
      pottery see references given in text.

As a commercial and artistic centre, no one city during the early
archaic period entered into serious rivalry with Corinth, which was at
a very remote date in relations with the East, and was one of the first
of the Greek states to extend the system of colonisation in the
Mediterranean, by the foundation of Corcyra, Syracuse, and other
important outposts. The epoch of this supremacy and of its commercial
prosperity extends from the eighth to the sixth century B.C., being
coincident with the rule of the great tyrants, Periander, Kypselos,
etc. In the course of the sixth century, when the Athenian tyranny rose
to such a great height under Peisistratos, Corinth, with equal
rapidity, sank to a subordinate position, and her artistic supremacy
passed to the growing power of Athens. Hence it is fitting that Corinth
and its famous potteries should be the subject of our next section.

Two causes contributed to the importance of Corinth as a centre of
ceramic industry—the excellence of its clay (see p. 205), and its
position as a commercial port at the junction of the Peloponnese and
Central Greece. Pollux[1010] selects Corinthian clay for commendation,
and other writers speak of different varieties of pottery as
Corinthian. Hence it is not surprising that large quantities of pottery
should have been found here, the local origin of which is established
by the inscriptions in the Corinthian alphabet which are frequently
painted upon them; and not only that, but similar pottery has been
found almost all over the Mediterranean, being more widely distributed
than any other fabric except the Athenian B.F. and R.F. vases. The list
of sites as given by Wilisch is as follows: Athens, Eleusis, Aegina,
Argos, Kleonae, Tiryns, Mycenae, Thebes, and Tanagra in Greece; Euboea
(Karystos), Melos, Corfu, Crete, Rhodes,[1011] Samos, and Cyprus among
the islands; Hissarlik, Smyrna, Pontus, and the Crimea; Alexandria,
Naukratis, and Carthage; Syracuse and Selinus in Sicily, and Sardinia;
and many places in Italy, such as Bari, Nola, Capua, Cumae, Beneventum,
Cervetri, Vulci, Orvieto, Corneto, and Viterbo. M. Pottier thinks that
this wide distribution is due, not to the merit of the vases
themselves, which are often of poor style, but to the merchandise which
they contained. This might, at any rate, account for the great
preponderance of small oil-flasks, a form which took the place of the
Mycenaean “false amphora.”

The Corinthian vases are not, however, strictly homogeneous, and,
in fact, fall into certain distinct categories. The earliest class
found at Corinth stands quite by itself, and has been termed
“Proto-Corinthian,” though the justice of this title has been
strongly combated by some scholars. On many of the Sicilian and
Italian sites a class of small vases[1012] is found which differs
from the authentic Corinthian examples of the same forms, and may
not impossibly denote local fabrics. If this is so, they would
stand in the same relation to the genuine Corinthian as the
Boeotian Geometrical vases to those of the Dipylon, forming a sort
of supplementary fabric. At all events, such imitations of a
popular ware might reasonably be expected.

M. Pottier maintains that five distinct varieties of clay may be
observed, which partially serve as a basis for classification, apart
from questions of style and ornamentation. They are as follows: (1)
small vases of a greenish-yellow clay found in Greece, especially at
Corinth, but rare in Italy; (2) vases of cream-coloured clay from
Boeotia, and large kraters from Cervetri; (3) vases of reddish clay
from Boeotia, Euboea, and Etruria; (4) vases of white and grey clay,
very numerous in Italy; (5) vases of yellow clay, chiefly found in
Italy. Some of the “Proto-Corinthian” wares belong to Class (1), but as
a rule they are marked off from the rest by technique as well as
decoration. This first class is without doubt exclusively local, and
represents the ???aµ?? ????????? of Pollux; the same clay is even used
at Corinth at the present day. On one of the Penteskuphia pinakes (see
p. 316), the clay of which differs from the rest, a potter is
represented making an aryballos of “Proto-Corinthian” form[1013]; but
the majority belong to the second class, which is also local, and
includes the large kraters of advanced style with Corinthian
inscriptions. In colour and porosity the clay resembles that of
Boeotia. The red clay of Class (3) suggests a connection with Chalkis,
a question which needs future consideration (see below, p. 321); (4)
and (5) present analogies to the native clays of Italy, and include all
the local imitative fabrics. The older varieties with merely linear
decoration are most largely found at Corinth and Syracuse, and the
later with incised lines and figures of animals or men are
comparatively rare. But as far as the present state of our knowledge
permits, it is certainly possible to claim as Corinthian, at least in a
sense, all the varieties of fabrics which have been hitherto mentioned,
except probably the “Proto-Corinthian.”

In describing these fabrics in detail, it will be found more convenient
to ignore the technical differences, and adopt the more chronologically
accurate system of classification which follows the development of the
decoration. We thus obtain five distinct classes,[1014] which may be
summarised as follows:—

  1. “Proto-Corinthian” wares (called by M. Pottier the Corinthian
      Geometric style). 750–650 B.C., and later.

  2. Corinthian vases with incised scale-patterns or imbrications.

  3. Corinthian vases with floral decoration, ground-ornaments, and
      figures not incised.

  4. Similar vases, but with figures incised. [Classes 2 to 4 roughly
      cover the seventh century.]

  5. Corinthian vases without ground-ornaments, and with large friezes
      of animals or human figures; incised details. 600–550 B.C.

1. Although the priority of the so-called =Proto-Corinthian= or
Corinthian Geometrical pottery is certain, the term is, strictly
speaking, applied to vases of different dates, which are only connected
by form with the original fabrics.[1015] The distinction lies in the
fact that the earlier vases have linear decoration without purple
accessories or incised lines, both of which occur in the more developed
examples as the result of the revolution effected by the Corinthian
painters.[1016] They therefore fall into two main classes, of which the
earlier includes the larger vases with purely Geometrical decoration of
a simple type, doubtless reflecting the original local Geometrical
pottery, and sometimes with zones of animals. The figures are merely in
black silhouette. In the later class the vases are small, sometimes
diminutive, but of developed style, with zones of animals of the later
Corinthian type, and with purple accessories and incised lines. The
earlier class date from the eighth to the seventh century B.C.; the
later cannot be older than the sixth. For the dating of the earlier
group some evidence may be derived from the results of excavations at
Syracuse, founded from Corinth in 735 B.C. In its earliest cemeteries,
as also at Megara Hyblaea, numerous Proto-Corinthian vases of the
earlier class have been found.[1017] In Italy Proto-Corinthian wares
were found in trench-tombs of about 750–650 B.C., and in the earlier
chamber-tombs (see Chapter XVIII.). The older class disappears by the
end of the seventh century, when the typical Corinthian _aryballos_
(see p. 197) takes its place.

Besides Corinth and Syracuse, Proto-Corinthian vases have been found in
considerable numbers at the Argive Heraion, at Thebes, and in the
island of Aegina, and more rarely at Tiryns, Athens, Eleusis, Tanagra,
Smyrna, and Hissarlik. Out of thirty in the Berlin Museum, eight
certainly came from Corinth. Taking this into consideration, and also
the Corinthian origin of Syracuse, it is evident that there is, apart
from their style, a strong presumption in favour of their Corinthian
origin.[1018] As long ago, however, as 1877 Helbig cast doubts on this
and proposed to locate them at the rival commercial centre of
Chalkis.[1019] He was followed by Dümmler, Klein, and others,[1020] but
recently Aegina[1021] and Boeotia[1022] have also been suggested, the
latter at least for the earlier class. Yet more recently the pendulum
has swung in another direction, that of Argos,[1023] chiefly in view of
the extensive finds at the Heraion (not yet published). Two specimens
have recently been made known which bear inscriptions, but neither
yields very definite evidence. One is a signed vase (with the name of
Pyrrhos[1024]), in which the alphabet is mixed, but mainly Chalcidian
in character; in the other[1025] the inscriptions are fragmentary, but
though the letter S appears in Argive, not Corinthian, form, the ? is
not of the peculiar Argive [Argive S] type, but [Sicyonian ?]. The
Pyrrhos inscription cannot be much later than 700 B.C., and thus ranks
as the earliest known “signature.” Mr. Hoppin,[1026] arguing from the
Heraion finds, regards the Proto-Corinthian fabrics as a direct
offshoot of Mycenaean pottery, not as forming a link between the
Geometrical and the Corinthian. The term, however, may be preserved, as
implying priority in point of time, and it cannot be said as yet that
the Corinthian theory is absolutely disproved.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                               PLATE XIX

[Illustration:

  “PROTO-CORINTHIAN” AND EARLY CORINTHIAN VASES (BRITISH MUSEUM).
  1–3, 5, EARLY CORINTHIAN; 4, 6, “PROTO-CORINTHIAN.”
]

                  ------------------------------------

The dominating form is that of the _alabastron_ or lekythos, a
pear-shaped vase with flat round lip and flat handle. The aryballos
form is also known, as are the skyphos, pyxis, and a small krater. A
characteristic shape is the jug with flat base rising in pyramidal form
to a long cylindrical neck, with trefoil lip and handle.[1027] The
earlier group, although of “Corinthian” technique, usually have only
“Geometrical” ornament, such as water-birds or simple patterns; hence
they have been held, for instance, by M. Pottier, to represent the true
type of Corinthian Geometrical pottery. But it does not seem that the
Geometrical style was ever popular at Corinth, and there are many signs
that the Proto-Corinthian fabrics were to a great extent influenced
directly by Mycenaean wares. The patterns, which are in black
monochrome, are on the smaller vases limited to bands, rows of dots, or
a kind of “tongue”-pattern of stylised leaves. The Proto-Corinthian
vases found in Aegina[1028] form in some respects a class by
themselves, being often of considerable size; they also include some
unusual varieties, such as cups, and even amphorae.[1029] They usually
have Geometrical decoration in the form of zigzags, maeander, chevrons,
triangles, or parallel rays; on the larger ones are found friezes of
animals, such as dogs pursuing deer, bulls, or water-fowl.

  [Examples of this class are: B.M. A 487, 1050 ff. (see Plate XVII.
  figs. 4 and 6, XIX. fig. 1); Louvre E 13, 18, 32, 309, 375, 390, 396
  (_Atlas_, pls. 39, 40); Berlin, 316–35; _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1877, pls.
  C, D, U, V; _Ath. Mitth._ 1897, pl. 7 (B.M. A 1530, of Aegina type).]

The second class is one of considerable interest. It consists of a
series of miniature vases, of which some twenty in all are known, of
the pear-shaped lekythos form, with minute but skilfully-executed
figures in a very advanced style. At their head for beauty and delicacy
of execution stands the exquisite little Macmillan lekythos in the
British Museum,[1030] a masterpiece of its kind. There is also a fine
specimen in Berlin (No. 336), others in the Louvre[1031] and the
Syracuse Museum (the latter from the local excavations), and three very
fine ones have recently been acquired by the Boston Museum.[1032] But
for size and richness, if not for beauty, all these are surpassed by a
marvellous vase in the Chigi collection at Florence.[1033] This is a
jug or oinochoë, decorated with no less than four friezes, two of which
are broad, with numerous figures, the two alternate forming narrow
borders to these, with hunting scenes. The colouring is most
remarkable, the figures being painted in black, yellow ochre, and
bright crimson on a cream ground, with a lavish use of incised lines,
and on the upper narrow frieze the animals are actually painted in pale
buff on a black ground. The upper large frieze represents a combat,
with serried ranks of warriors and horsemen advancing to meet each
other, those on the right all having elaborate emblems on their shields
(birds, ox-heads, Gorgon-heads, etc.). On the lower friezes the figures
fall into groups: a four-horse chariot and a row of boys on horseback;
a Sphinx; hunters slaying a lion; and lastly a fragmentary group,
clearly representing the Judgment of Paris (see Chapter XIV.). It is
the figures of this group which bear the inscriptions alluded to above.
As an instance of the extreme richness and delicacy of the painting,
attention should be called to the chariot-horses in the lower frieze,
which are drawn slightly in advance of each other, and painted
respectively yellow, black, red, and yellow.

The Macmillan lekythos, in spite of its diminutive size, is decorated
with no less than three friezes of human figures and animals, as well
as other ornaments; the main design represents a combat of warriors;
the next, a race of boys on horseback; the lowest, dogs pursuing a
hare, and a crouching ape. The total height of the vase is barely 2¾
inches, and yet every detail in these friezes is marked with surprising
care and accuracy, the shield-devices of the warriors, for instance,
being drawn with wonderful minuteness. The three Boston vases are
interesting for their subjects: on one is Bellerophon slaying the
Chimaera; on the next, a hero attacking a lion with a human head on its
back (a monster no doubt _suggested by_ the Chimaera); the third has
the favourite early subject of Herakles’ combat with the Centaurs. In
all these vases the use of a red colour on the human figures should be
noted, a technical device which we have already noted in the figures on
the Melian amphorae (see above, p. 301).

It is abundantly clear that such work could not have been produced in
the eighth, or even the seventh, century; the style is virtually that
of the subsequent black-figured vases, and we are therefore forced to
the conclusion that these miniature vases were made under the more or
less direct influence of the later Corinthian wares proper, at a time
when that style was developing into the black-figured.

With the Proto-Corinthian ware may be linked a series of vases in the
form of animals, human heads, etc., which imitate Oriental porcelain
vases and show an early development of the plastic art which is
remarkable for its advanced style (see pp. 127, 492). The decoration of
these vases is usually of a simple Geometrical character. They are
found in Rhodes and on many other sites, such as Eretria, Vulci, and
Nola.

2. =Vases with incised imbrications.=—The importance of this class is
betokened by the appearance of the incised line, which as a matter of
pure technique is of course only a revival from the primitive fabrics,
but as an adjunct to figure-decoration in order to express details is
an entirely new feature (see above, p. 306, and below, p. 313). It was
probably derived from metal-work, in which it had long been familiar,
as the Boeotian Geometrical fibulae and the early Corinthian or
Chalcidian bronze reliefs testify. Although destined largely to
revolutionise design, it was at first used with restraint. In the vases
under consideration it is confined to the imbrications[1034] or
scale-patterns with which the body is largely covered (Plate XIX. fig.
3). They were produced by means of a compass in which the graving-tool
was fixed, the edge of each scale forming an arc of a circle, the
centre points of which are usually visible. This scale-pattern is not a
new feature in the decoration of vases; it appears in a painted form on
many Mycenaean specimens,[1035] and was also adopted by the Ionian
painters of Daphnae in the Egyptian Delta (see p. 352). But as a more
satisfactory result was obtained by incising, the Corinthian variety
soon became exceedingly popular. The effect is often enhanced by the
use of red colour.[1036] In some cases this ornament is combined with
painted friezes of animals (as in the Louvre vase E 421). The shapes
employed are various, but a new and conspicuous variety is the large
jug or _olpe_, with circular lip and large discs attached on either
side to the tops of the handles. Attempts have been made to dissociate
this fabric from Corinth, by attributing it to Rhodes, Ionia, and
Sicily[1037]; but although it is certainly true that large numbers were
found in Rhodes and in Sicily, the claims of neither prevail over those
of Corinth, and the most that can be said with any certainty is that
some are local imitations. It is, moreover, possible to discover their
prototypes in the Proto-Corinthian wares.

3. =Vases with floral decoration=, but no incised lines (about 700–650
B.C.).—Towards the end of the eighth century may be observed an influx
of Oriental motives, transforming the Corinthian style, just as at
Athens it transformed the local style, producing the Phaleron ware. Its
effect can also be observed in Etruria (Chapter XVIII.). It is largely
due to historical causes, such as the development of Greek commerce and
colonial expansion, and generally to the fusion of Dorian and Ionian
elements. Hence the prominent characteristic which distinguishes the
new variety from the Proto-Corinthian; namely, the employment of
vegetable ornament, not from direct observation of nature, but
conventionalised. These patterns seem to be largely drawn from Oriental
textile embroideries, and mainly take the form of rosettes, leaves, and
flowers strewn all over the field; according to some writers, this is
the explanation of the phrase _spargentes lineas intus_,[1038] used in
connection with the Corinthian painters Aridikes and Telephanes.
_Ground_-ornaments are almost unknown in Oriental art; but their
adoption from the embroideries would only exemplify the principle,
universal in early art, of imitating in one material the salient
features of another. It has been suggested that these flowers and
leaves are intended to represent the ground on which the animals are
walking. If this is so, the effect is due to a principle already
existing in Mycenaean art—the conventional rendering of perspective by
placing objects whose real position is beyond the principal subjects in
the same vertical plane with them. Another favourite pattern, either as
a ground-ornament or as part of the subordinate decoration, is a
combination of the palmette and lotos-flower, picked out with purple
accessories[1039]; this pattern is purely conventional, and often
assumes colossal dimensions in relation to the size of the vase. The
purple accessories, which now become very common, may possibly be
connected with another traditional Corinthian invention, that of
Ekphantos, who used a red pigment made from pounded earth (see p.
395).[1040]

As regards shapes, the alabastron and aryballos[1041] are preeminently
popular; the flat-bottomed jug, the pyxis or covered jar, and the
skyphos or kotyle, are also found (see Plate XIX. figs. 1, 2, 5). There
arises now a tendency in the larger vases to divide the body into zones
or friezes, which henceforth become a characteristic feature. The
subjects are strictly limited to animals such as the lion, or various
types of birds; and friezes of running dogs and other quadrupeds now
become the typical Corinthian motive.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                                PLATE XX

_To face page 312_

[Illustration:

  1. COVERED JAR OF CORINTHIAN FABRIC.
  2. “RHODIAN” OINOCHOE.
  (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

                  ------------------------------------

4. =Vases with floral decoration and figures with incised lines= (about
650–600 B.C.).—In this next stage, the date of which corresponds with
the later trench-tombs and older chamber-tombs of Etruria (see Chapter
XVIII.), there is a marked tendency of the vases to increase in size,
and several new forms are either introduced for the first time or
increase in popularity. Besides the ever-popular aryballos and
alabastron, there are various forms of covered jars, the cylindrical
pyxis, and the so-called _lekane_, a sort of tureen; also various
drinking-cups, the kotyle, the so-called _kothon_, and the kylix, the
last a new type. Its prototype is perhaps to be sought in the shallow
four-handled bowls of the Boeotian Geometrical ware, and it is marked
by its bent-over rim and low foot.[1042]

The decoration loses all restraint, and the prevailing idea with the
artist is the _horror vacui_ which impels him to fill up every vacant
part of the surface, at the expense of utterly conventionalising his
figures and ornaments and distorting their forms (cf. Plate XIX. figs.
1, 5, and XX. fig. 1). The vases contrast unfavourably with their
Ionian contemporaries, in which, however profuse the ground-ornaments,
the importance of the figures is never lost sight of, and they never
fail to strike the eye. Incised lines and purple accessories are
employed freely, and even the rosettes are always marked by cross-wise
incisions.

Incision as a method of ornamenting vases was of course always known
from the earliest times, but it was not until now employed within and
round painted designs. Hitherto the only alternatives were plain
silhouettes (as in Geometrical vases) or half-opaque, half-outlined
figures (as in Mycenaean and some early Ionian vases). The former,
however, were too conventional, the latter too elaborate, and the new
method of painting _plus_ engraving reconciled the two, being at once
more realistic and more rapid. It is generally supposed that this
method was a Corinthian invention (compare its use in the imbricated
vases, p. 311), but it is not unknown in early Attic vases, and Böhlau
attributes its origin to an early Ionian tendency to imitate metal
ware.[1043] But this was an anomaly, and the Ionians never took to the
incising method, preferring outline designs or inner lines of white
paint (see p. 331). In any case the Corinthians were the first to adopt
it and popularise it.

The subjects, which now begin to present greater interest, include all
kinds of animals and monsters, arranged in friezes, and by degrees
human figures, and even scenes from mythology, make their appearance.
Some vases have only decorative ornament, such as a flower of four
long, pointed petals, which is frequently found on the aryballi.[1044]
The animals include the lion, panther, boar, bull, ram, deer, goat,
swan, and eagle; the monsters are Gryphons, Sphinxes, or Sirens, and a
sea-deity of which the upper part is human (both male and female), the
lower is in the form of a sinuous fish-tail, and the figure is often
winged in addition.[1045] It is possible that in these figures we may
see the local sea-deities Palaemon and Ino-Leukothea. The human figures
are either single, ranged in friezes, or in groups; the favourite types
are combats of two warriors and Bacchanalian dances; hunting scenes;
and warriors setting out in chariots. The mythological scenes include
the combat of Herakles with the Centaurs,[1046] and scenes from the
Trojan War, such as the combat of Ajax and Aeneas, or the episode of
Dolon.[1047]

So far, then, in the three groups of Corinthian fabrics proper, we are
able to trace the working of M. Pottier’s law of the _hiérarchie des
genres_,[1048] the law which was made by M. Dumont the basis of his
work _Les Céramiques de Grèce propre_ (vol. i., dealing with the
earlier fabrics). According to this law, the decoration of vases
advances by a logical process from linear patterns to floral ornament,
and then from animals to human, and finally mythological, figures.
Another feature in this group is that inscriptions now appear for the
first time. They became exceedingly popular at Corinth, and on most of
the vases with figure-subjects they may be found, each person bearing a
name, whether the scene is mythological or not.[1049] The fashion seems
to have received an impetus from the chest of Kypselos, which was
largely a Corinthian work, and often shows close parallel with the
vases (see below). We have a signed vase with figures in this style by
Chares (Louvre E 609), and others by Timonidas (Athens 620), and
Milonidas (a pinax in Louvre).[1050] The abundance of these
inscriptions has done much to increase our knowledge of the somewhat
peculiar Corinthian alphabet (see Chapter XVII.).

Among the vases of this period one of the most remarkable is the
so-called Dodwell vase in Munich (Fig. 90),[1051] found at Mertese,
near Corinth, about the year 1800, and purchased by the explorer
Dodwell. It is a cylindrical jar or box (_pyxis_), with cover,
decorated round the sides and on the top. Round the body are two
friezes of animals, with numerous flowers as ground-ornaments; on the
top of the cover is a frieze representing a boar-hunt, in which eight
fancifully-named personages take more or less active part. Of these
Philon lies dead under the boar’s feet; Thersandros attacks it with a
sword in front, and Pakon discharges an arrow at it from behind. Behind
him Andrytas hurls a spear, and he is followed by four inactive
figures, all draped and unarmed—Dorimachos, Sakis, Alka ... and
Agamemnon. The scene is closed by a heraldic group of two Sphinxes. It
will be observed that here, as in other contemporary scenes with human
figures, the ground-ornaments are already showing a tendency to die
out; perhaps under the influence of Ionia, where it was soon discovered
that they interfered with the effect of figures in action. The alphabet
of the inscriptions enables us to date this vase about 650–620 B.C.

[Illustration: FIG. 90. THE DODWELL PYXIS (COVER).]

The _pinakes_, or votive tablets, from Penteskuphia, of which mention
has been made elsewhere (p. 51), form an important feature in this
group, both from their subjects, their inscriptions, and the method of
painting. They appear to range in date from 650 to 550 B.C., and fall
into three classes in point of style. The earliest have designs in rude
silhouette without incised lines; in the second only the contours of
the figures are incised; the third are like the vases, with incised
lines and purple details. In a few cases the clay is red, not
drab-coloured. Some are decorated on both sides, but the majority on
one only, and they were clearly intended for hanging up in a temple.
Two of them are signed by artists, Timonidas and Milonidas,[1052] and
there are other interesting inscriptions, besides the ordinary
dedications to Poseidon and Amphitrite (see Chapter XVII.). The
subjects are partly the same as on the vases, but the majority fall
under two heads: (_a_) Poseidon and Amphitrite, standing or in a
chariot (Fig. 115); (_b_) _genre_ scenes from Corinthian industries,
such as miners digging out clay, potters and painters at work, and
vessels exporting pottery over the sea (cf. pp. 207, 216, and Chapter
XV. § 5). Of the subjects common to the vases, Oriental animal-types
and horses occur most frequently; also rosettes and floral
ground-ornaments.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                               PLATE XXI

[Illustration: 1. IMITATION CORINTHIAN KRATER, RETURN OF HEPHAISTOS; 2,
CORINTHIAN KRATER WITH BOAR-HUNT (BRITISH MUSEUM).]

                  ------------------------------------

5. The vases of the fifth class (600–550 B.C.) are characterised by the
prevalence of =human and mythological subjects=, with large friezes of
animals, a general use of incised lines, and an absence of
ground-ornaments. They are mostly of considerable size, but small vases
still continued to be made during the sixth century, as is seen in the
“Proto-Corinthian” lekythi. The amphora and hydria now first make their
appearance; the later lekythi approach more to the Attic form.[1053]
One or two other typical shapes may also be noticed, such as the
column-handled krater (Plate XXI.) and the trefoil-mouthed jug with a
panel on one side of the vase only; the prototype of the former we have
seen in the krater of Aristonoös. Another important feature is the
general use of a red ground in the place of the old creamy white; and
yet another, the use of white accessories, especially for the flesh of
female figures. It should be noted that this white is always applied
directly on the clay, as in Ionian fabrics, not as in the Attic, upon
the black varnish. We may bear in mind that it was about this time that
the Athenian Eumaros _marem a femina discrevit_, according to Pliny;
but his date is uncertain, and the bearing of this invention on the
vase-paintings is not to be accepted without hesitation. For the faces
of male figures purple is often used, and, generally speaking, the
vases tend to present a polychrome appearance. This again is an Ionian
characteristic.

The subjects now take a much wider range, and include almost every
variety known in the earlier part of the sixth century. Friezes of
animals seldom form the main motive of decoration, but are placed in
subordination either on the shoulder or low down on the body. Some of
the older types still linger, such as the monsters and fish-tailed
sea-deities, and also that of a heraldic group of two animals with a
palmette and lotos pattern between, suggesting the old Assyrian motive
of two animals guarding the sacred tree. Generally, there is a great
advance in composition; but two traditional principles are still
observed—the juxtaposition of figures turned in the same direction, as
in Oriental compositions, and a symmetrical disposition of the two
sides converging to a centre, a “Continental” principle already seen in
the Dipylon vases. The subjects taken from daily life include combats,
banquets, Bacchic or grotesque dances, hunting-scenes, warriors setting
out for battle, and processions. Some appear now for the first time,
as, for instance, the banquets. Among the mythological scenes, Herakles
and his adventures find most favour; scenes from the Trojan cycle are
far from uncommon; and other myths of more isolated character are those
of Amphiaraos, Perseus, and the Theban cycle (Tydeus killing Ismene).
Many of the mythological scenes are really only _genre_ scenes with
names added; for instance, the krater in the Louvre with Herakles’
reception by Eurytos (E 635), is only an ordinary banquet-scene in
composition, but for the inscriptions; and so with many others, as we
have also observed in the preceding class.

It may suffice to describe one vase in detail as typical of the later
Corinthian wares. This is the so-called Amphiaraos krater in
Berlin,[1054] a column-handled krater of considerable size and very
richly decorated. It belongs to a series exceptionally well represented
in the Louvre (E 613–39; all found, like this, at Cervetri), and
illustrating the absolutely latest development of Corinthian pictorial
art. Its special interest is that it affords a close comparison in
several points with the chest of Kypselos. The subjects are disposed in
two rows all round the vase, of which the upper is the more important,
containing two mythological subjects. These, which are unequally
divided, one occupying more of the circumference than the other, are
the Departure of Amphiaraos and the Funeral Games for Pelias,[1055] the
???? ? ?p? ?e??? of Pausanias.[1056] On the lower frieze are seven boys
taking part in a horse-race, seven groups of combatants, and two
marching hoplites. It will be noted that there is no frieze of animals.

The Amphiaraos scene depicts that hero in the act of ascending his
war-chariot, in which the driver Baton stands; he turns to look at his
family behind, consisting of two daughters, a son, and an infant in the
nurse’s arms, and last of all his wife Eriphyle, who stands in the rear
with the pearl necklace, the price of her treachery. Her children seem
to be supplicating for her. In the background Amphiaraos’ house is
indicated by a Doric building. The correspondence of this scene with
the description of the Kypselos chest[1057] is extraordinary; the
latter might almost be a description of the vase. An interesting
feature of this painting is formed by the animals which are scattered
over the scene: a hare, a hedgehog, an owl and another bird, a serpent,
a scorpion, and a lizard or salamander.[1058]

The funeral games for Pelias adjoined the Amphiaraos scene on the
chest, just as they do here, except that the scene on the vase is only
an excerpt from the contest of the Pentathlon, which is there complete.
We have here only the wrestling (by Peleus and Hippalkimos), and in
place of the other scenes a chariot-race, with the judges waiting to
decide the result; as on the chest, tripods are standing ready as
prizes for the victor. It must not, of course, be supposed that these
scenes are directly copied from the chest—the discrepancies are too
great, although the parallels are very interesting; but the only object
of such comparisons is to assist us to an idea of the appearance of
these great contemporary works of art.[1059]

One of the chief features of this class is the almost total
disappearance of the ground-ornaments. Sometimes indeed a frieze of
animals with the old profusion of rosettes is combined on the same vase
with a design of figures on a clear field; but, generally speaking,
rosettes are not found with the figure subjects. Their place is almost
supplied by the inscriptions, which become more and more extensively
employed, even for animals. Accessory colours are used in a purely
conventional fashion, not to reproduce nature, but—probably—to
reproduce metal-work. Thus we may surmise that white is intended to
give the effect of silver (or ivory) and red that of copper (or gold),
just as such substances were used on the chest of Kypselos in order to
give variety and picturesqueness to the surface. The black then
represents the ground of bronze or wood.

The sixth-century Corinthian vase-paintings have a special importance
at the present day, because they are almost the only remnant left to us
of the artistic products of the city at that time.[1060] Though not of
course to be reckoned as examples of the higher art, they yet reflect
it in some measure, and help us to reconstruct such works as the chest
of Kypselos, almost every subject on which finds a parallel in the
Corinthian vases. And it is possible that they are important in another
respect. We know from Pliny that there was a very influential school of
painting centred at Corinth in this century, which is represented by
the names of Kleanthes and Aridikes, Ekphantos, Aregon, and perhaps
also Kimon of Kleonae. Although Professor Robert[1061] has endeavoured
to show that the traditions are untrustworthy, and places Kimon in the
seventh century, Kleanthes later, the probability is that they may
fairly be upheld, and Pliny’s dates accepted. Allusion has already been
made to the inventions traditionally associated with Aridikes and
Ekphantos; but Kimon belongs to a later development of painting
altogether, and must be reserved for a later chapter. Of Kleanthes it
is only stated that he “invented linear drawing,” whatever that may
mean; Pliny, our informant, was perhaps hardly aware himself, and is no
more definite as to the period at which he lived. We can only,
therefore, assume that he marks the epoch of some new departure or
advance in contour or outline drawing.[1062]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                              PLATE XXII

[Illustration: CHALCIDIAN VASE: HERAKLES AND GERYON; QUADRIGA
(BIBLIOTHÈQUE NATIONALE).]

                  ------------------------------------

There are a few vases which, on account of various peculiarities, can
only be described as “imitation Corinthian.” Among these may be
mentioned one with an inscription in the Sicyonian alphabet (Berlin
1147), and a krater in the British Museum (B 42 on Plate XXI.) with
designs on a white ground, which from the similarity of its style to
the Berlin vase may be linked therewith.[1063] The late F. Dümmler was
of opinion that these two vases were made at Sikyon. There is also the
group of vases from Caere in the Campana collection of the Louvre,
which have usually been regarded as imitations of Corinthian ware made
in Italy; but M. Pottier in his catalogue makes no distinction between
these and the genuine Corinthian fabrics.

                         § 4. CHALCIDIAN VASES

A very puzzling class of vases, about which little is at present known,
is that formed by the so-called Chalcidian group. They are so named
from the fact of their bearing inscriptions which may undoubtedly be
referred to the alphabet of Chalkis in Eretria; but there is no
evidence that they were actually made there. We know, however, that
Chalkis was a great art-centre and rival of Corinth in the seventh and
sixth centuries, and was especially famous for work in metal. As,
therefore, more than one of these vases bears evident indications, in
the shape of the handles, the ornamentation, and other details, of an
imitation of metallic originals, there may be some ground for the
attribution. Only a dozen or so of these vases with Chalcidian
inscriptions are known, and several of them are in character almost to
be ranked with the developed B.F. Attic wares; their date cannot
therefore be earlier than the middle of the sixth century, probably
about 560–540 B.C. On the other hand, they often present a close
parallel, especially in the ornamental patterns, to the later
Corinthian wares,[1064] whence it seems probable that they form, like
the so-called Tyrrhenian amphorae (see below), a connecting-link
between Corinth and Athens. While as yet it is impossible to obtain a
definite idea of the characteristics of “Chalcidian” vases, the attempt
to classify other uninscribed vases with them can only be very
tentative, although there is more than one in the British Museum, in
the Louvre, and elsewhere, which presents some feature especially
typical of the inscribed examples.[1065]

The prevailing shape is the amphora, all but one of the inscribed group
coming under this heading, in which the outline of the body approaches
nearer to a pure ellipse than is usual in this form; the typical
ornaments are rows of oblique zigzags and a peculiar variety of the
lotos-pattern. An occasional rosette in the field preserves a trace of
Corinthian influence. The subjects are mainly mythological, such as the
combat of Herakles and Geryon, battle-scenes from the Trojan legends,
etc.; and two points are worth noting as apparently characteristic of
the group: (1) the tendency to represent fallen figures in full face,
which is very rare in archaic vase-painting; (2) the type of Geryon,
who is winged, and not, as in the Attic vases, “three men joined
together,” as Pausanias describes the figure on the chest of Kypselos,
but a triple-headed, six-armed monster.

The most typical example of the class is the amphora in the Hope
collection at Deepdene,[1066] with scenes from the Trojan War. Ajax
stands over the body of Achilles, defending it from the attacks of
Glaukos, whom he has wounded, and of Paris, who has just discharged his
bow; behind the latter advance Aeneas and two other Trojans with
spears, while a fourth falls back wounded. Achilles and the two wounded
men are all shown in full face.[1067] The combat is watched by a stiff
archaic figure of Athena, with serpent-fringed aegis, and behind her,
standing apart, is Diomede, having his wounded hand bound up by
Sthenelos. The drawing on the whole is accurate, and the style more
vigorous and less conventional than that of the Attic vases.

Two of the group represent Herakles encountering Geryon: an amphora in
the British Museum (B 155) and one in the Bibliothèque at Paris (202).
In the latter the figure of Athena is almost exactly repeated from the
Deepdene vase, and behind her is a group of cattle. The reverse of this
vase represents a quadriga seen from the front (a typical Chalcidian
subject). Both sides of the vase are illustrated in Plate XXII.

Until the whole series of Chalcidian vases is properly studied and
estimated,[1068] it is difficult to give an adequate account of this
important group; we append, however, a list of those bearing
inscriptions in the alphabet, and a few others for various reasons
associated with them.[1069]

                       §5. “TYRRHENIAN AMPHORAE”

There is a large and important class of vases, not differing in
technique from the Attic B.F. vases proper, yet clearly of earlier
date, and while not exclusively Attic in all their characteristics, yet
sufficiently so to suggest that they are closely connected therewith.
The problem which these vases have for a long time presented is whether
they merely represent an early stage of the Attic B.F. fabrics, linking
them to the “Proto-Attic,” or whether they owe their origin to foreign,
_e.g._ Corinthian, sources.

About eighty vases, nearly all amphorae, have been recognised as
presenting the characteristics of this class, and all have been found
in Italy, chiefly at Cervetri and Vulci; hence they have been known for
many years. As long ago as 1830 the name “Tyrrhenian amphorae” was
applied to them by Gerhard, meaning thereby a sort of cross between
Greek vases proper and those of obviously Italian origin. The name has
adhered to them, and was also used generally to describe the
characteristic form of amphora, with its cylindrical neck and
egg-shaped body[1070]; but it was not long before it began to be
realised that the vases bore inscriptions in the Attic dialect, and,
further, that the subjects on them had much in common with the later
Corinthian fabrics. Thereupon sprang up the idea, fostered by
Loeschcke,[1071] that the vases were made by Athenian potters, but that
they were largely indebted to Corinthian—or, as Loeschcke called them,
Peloponnesian—prototypes.[1072] For the last ten years or so they have
been generally known as “Corintho-Attic,” but Thiersch, the most recent
writer on the subject,[1073] reverts to the old name of Tyrrhenian,
using it of course in a purely conventional sense. His conclusion is
that the class is to be regarded as “old Attic,” rather than imitative
of Corinthian, and he shows clearly that it must be regarded as a
development of the Vourva vases (p. 299), as will be seen from an
examination of the vase given in Fig. 89, p. 299; but that it is
entirely free from Corinthian influence can hardly be maintained. We
have seen that the Vourva class borrowed from Corinth the friezes of
animals which are also characteristic of this group, and it is possible
that this influence continued to make itself felt. At all events, this
ware belongs to the first half of the sixth century B.C., and stands in
close relation to the François vase, and others which represent the
earliest school of Attic B.F. artists. Its specially Attic
characteristic are, according to Holwerda, (1) the inscriptions, (2)
the clay, (3) the types of the lotos and other ornaments, (4) the
importance given to one subject, (5) the thin proportions of the
figures.[1074]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                             PLATE XXIII

[Illustration: “TYRRHENIAN” AMPHORA: DEATH OF POLYXENA (BRIT. MUS.).]

                  ------------------------------------

The vases are for the most part decorated in the same manner, with an
elaborate lotos-and-honeysuckle pattern on either side of the neck, and
several friezes of figures, usually three, covering the body, of which
all but the principal one are composed of animals or monsters. The
principal frieze is always the upper one, covering the body from the
neck to the middle. The friezes are more numerous on the earlier
examples; they become fewer as Corinthian characteristics give way to
Attic. Altogether, these vases are remarkably homogeneous, both in
style, in shape, and in technique, and it has even been suggested that
the whole series is the work of one man; nor is this an impossibility.

An interesting feature is formed by the inscriptions,[1075] which are
of frequent occurrence. They tend, however, to degenerate into
meaningless collocations of letters, which some have thought to
represent Corinthian inscriptions misunderstood; but the alphabet is
pure Attic throughout, except for the double forms on the Berlin
amphora (see below), and a Chalcidian [Chalcidian G] for G on a vase in
the British Museum. The artist is fond of giving his figures surnames,
and thus we find Hermes styled ?????????, “of Kyllene,” Nestor ??????,
“of Pylos,” and Ajax [?]????d??, “son of Oileus,” a feature which
hardly occurs on any other class of vases. The meaningless inscriptions
are not easy to account for; certain groups of letters are repeated
over and over again, and it has been suggested by Thiersch that they
are analogous to the friezes of animals, with their repetitions and
combinations. They also seem to serve a decorative purpose by filling
up spaces.

The subjects are mainly mythological, with many features of interest.
For several the artist seems to have had a decided preference, such as
the combats of Herakles with Amazons and with the Centaur Nessos, that
of the Lapiths with the Centaurs, the adventure of Troilos and Polyxena
from the Trojan legends. Bacchic scenes are altogether wanting, but on
many examples a Corinthian type is adopted in their place, representing
grotesque dancing figures in various attitudes.[1076] Of scenes from
daily life, combats of armed warriors and young riders galloping
prevail above all others; the latter are, as on the Caeretan hydriae
(p. 355), little more than decorative. Generally speaking, it is
doubtful if Loeschcke’s idea of types borrowed from the Peloponnese can
be maintained; it is true that some scenes which occur on the chest of
Kypselos may be found, but the treatment is not quite the same; and
some subjects seem to be rather from an Ionic source. The animals or
monsters which form the subordinate friezes include the Sphinx and
Siren; the lion, panther, goat, and deer; the eagle, swan, and
cock.[1077]

Some of the vases call for more than passing mention, especially the
remarkable Berlin vase (_Cat._ 1704) with the Birth of Athena, and the
richly decorated specimen recently acquired by the British Museum, with
the Death of Polyxena. The former seems to be the earliest example of
its subject, and in the number and arrangement of the figures it
resembles the fine early Attic amphora in the British Museum (B 147).
Its chief interest is epigraphical, in the use of the double forms
(Corinthian and Attic) in the same word of the letters E ([Corinthian
E]) and ? (?).[1078] Over the figure of Hermes is written ??µ?? e?µ?
????????? (sc. ?????????), as already noted above. This vase may be
regarded as having established the “type” for the subject so long
popular on Attic vases, until Pheidias created a new and more ideal
version.[1079] The Museum vase (Plate XXIII.) has a very remarkable
representation of a subject rare in Greek art, with several unique
features.[1080] The body of Polyxena is carried in a rigid horizontal
position by Ajax Iliades (_sc._ son of Oïleus) and two others, to the
tomb of Achilles, over which Neoptolemos stands to perform the fatal
deed. Phoenix, Diomede, and Nestor “of Pylos” are spectators of the act.

The style of the vases as a whole is coarse and clumsy, though it often
rises to a greater standard of merit; the lines are often mechanically
drawn and lifeless, which may be to some extent the result of
imitation. Details of drapery are seldom shown, except that the dresses
are often richly decorated with incised patterns, but the folds are
never indicated.[1081]

-----

Footnote 930:

  Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ i. p. 222–3.

Footnote 931:

  Wide, in _Ath. Mitth._ 1896, p. 385 ff.; see also _ibid._ 1893, p.
  138.

Footnote 932:

  Cf. the results from the Argive Heraion (Waldstein, i. p. 49 ff.).

Footnote 933:

  Cf. Horace, _Ep._ ii. 1, 156: _Graecia capta ferum victorem cepit, et
  artes intulit agresti Latio_.

Footnote 934:

  M. Pottier notes the unexpected repetition of curvilinear elements in
  Geometrical pottery (_Louvre Cat._ i. p. 223).

Footnote 935:

  For Melos, see _Jahrbuch_, 1886, p. 112; for Thera, H. von
  Gaertringen, _Thera_, ii. p. 127 ff.; _Ath. Mitth._ 1903, p. 1 ff.;
  for Crete, _Brit. School Annual_, 1899–1900, p. 91.

Footnote 936:

  Cesnola, _Cyprus_, pl. 29; _B.M. Excavations in Cyprus_, p. 103, fig.
  150; Dörpfeld, _Troja und Ilion_, i. p. 304.

Footnote 937:

  See Wide’s study of the pottery in the Athens Museum, _Jahrbuch_,
  xiv. (1899), pp. 26, 78, 188; xv. (1900), p. 49.

Footnote 938:

  _Zur Geschichte d. Anfänge d. Kunst_, p. 1 ff. (_Sitzungsber. d. k.
  Akad. d. Wiss._ Wien, 1870, lxiv. p. 505 ff.).

Footnote 939:

  See Bibliography.

Footnote 940:

  Perrot and Chipiez, vii. pp. 51, 208.

Footnote 941:

  _J.H.S._ viii. p. 68 ff.; cf. _Ath. Mitth._ 1887, p. 223 ff.

Footnote 942:

  See p. 35, and _Ath. Mitth._ 1893, p. 73 ff.

Footnote 943:

  _E.g._ B.M. A 383, 384; Louvre, A 490, 491; _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1872,
  pl. K, fig. 12.

Footnote 944:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1886, p. 95.

Footnote 945:

  _Hist. de l’Art_, vii. p. 165, reproduced in Fig 83. The part
  bracketed denotes the ornamentation of the neck.

Footnote 946:

  See Riegl, _Stilfragen_, p. 150 ff.

Footnote 947:

  _E.g._ _B.M. Cat. of Bronzes_, 600.

Footnote 948:

  _J.H.S._ xix. pl. 8.

Footnote 949:

  For other instances of ships on Dipylon vases, see Chapter XV. § 7;
  also _Mon. Grecs_, xi.–xiii. (1882–4), p. 40 ff.; _Rev. Arch._ xxv.
  (1894), p. 14 ff.

Footnote 950:

  Cf. Perrot, _Hist. de l’Art_, vii. p. 57.

Footnote 951:

  Schliemann, _Tiryns_, pl. 13; _J.H.S._ xvii. pl. 3, p. 70.

Footnote 952:

  _Arch. Zeit._ 1885, pl. 8.

Footnote 953:

  _Jahrbuch_, i. (1886), p. 119.

Footnote 954:

  The most important of the Dipylon vases have been published in the
  _Monumenti_, vol. ix. pl. 39, and _Annali_, 1872, pl. 1, besides the
  others already mentioned. See also Cesnola, _Cyprus_, pl. 29; _Louvre
  Cat._ A 516–19, 526, 575; _Athens Cat._ 196–214, 350, etc.

Footnote 955:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1888, p. 325 ff.

Footnote 956:

  _Hist. de l’Art_, vii. p. 212.

Footnote 957:

  _Monuments Piot_, i. p. 35 ff.

Footnote 958:

  A 575 in the Louvre, with funeral scenes; Fig. 86 below.

Footnote 959:

  See Riegl, _Stilfragen_, p. 173.

Footnote 960:

  Riegl, fig. 81.

Footnote 961:

  _Cat._ 306; _Jahrbuch_, 1888, p. 357.

Footnote 962:

  On these fibulae see _B.M. Cat. of Bronzes_, p. xxxix, and Nos.
  119–21, 3204–5.

Footnote 963:

  This would seem to suggest a textile origin for Geometrical patterns,
  at least on Boeotian vases.

Footnote 964:

  _E.g._ B 57–8 in Brit. Mus.

Footnote 965:

  _Jahrbuch_, i. (1886), p. 99 ff.: see also, for relations with Egypt,
  p. 114.

Footnote 966:

  Dörpfeld, _Troja und Ilion_, i. p. 304 ff.

Footnote 967:

  See Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ i. p. 232, and _Ath. Mitth._ 1892, p. 285.

Footnote 968:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1886, p. 106; Pottier, _op. cit._ p. 229.

Footnote 969:

  In the B.F. period, pinakes and prothesis-amphorae (Athens 688–690,
  845–847; Berlin 1811–26, 1887–89); in the R.F. period, the white
  lekythi.

Footnote 970:

  See Pottier, _op. cit._ i. p. 135 ff.

Footnote 971:

  See also _Ath. Mitth._ xiii. (1888), p. 280.

Footnote 972:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1895, pl. 3.

Footnote 973:

  See _J.H.S._ xxii. p. 35.

Footnote 974:

  Ionian influence in the early part of the sixth century is also
  indicated by the finds of Rhodian and Naucratite pottery on the
  Acropolis at Athens; and in another way by the style of the vases
  found at Vourva and others from Eretria: see Böhlau, _Aus ion. u.
  ital. Nekrop._, p. 116; Nilsson in _Jahrbuch_, 1903, p. 124 ff.

Footnote 975:

  Cf. Athens 464, 469; _Jahrbuch_, 1897, pl. 7; _Notizie degli Scavi_,
  1895, p. 186, as examples of the transition.

Footnote 976:

  Cf. the large Boeotian p????, (Plate XLVII., and _Bull. de Corr.
  Hell._ 1898, p. 497 ff.).

Footnote 977:

  Athens 665–66: cf. 469.

Footnote 978:

  See Chapter XIV.

Footnote 979:

  See Chapter XVII.

Footnote 980:

  _Ashmolean Vases_, No. 189.

Footnote 981:

  In the Vatican (Helbig, i. p. 435, No. 641). Reinach, i. 179 =
  _Wiener Vorl._ 1888, 1, 8.

Footnote 982:

  For the interpretation of the inscription see _J.H.S._ x. p. 187
  (Ramsay); _Arch.-epigr. Mitth. aus Oesterr.-Ungarn_, 1888, p. 85
  (Dümmler); _Class. Review_, 1900, p. 264 (Richards). The last
  explanation (Aristonoös) seems the most natural. See Chapter XVII.

Footnote 983:

  Schliemann, _Mycenae_, p. 133: cf. Pottier in _Revue Arch._ xxviii.
  (1896), p. 19. The technique of the vase is not strictly Mycenaean,
  as the use of yellow colour for details implies.

Footnote 984:

  _Berl. Phil. Woch._ 1895, p. 201.

Footnote 985:

  See _Jahrbuch_, 1887, p. 58.

Footnote 986:

  That they are an immediate development of the Dipylon style is
  indicated by various features of the later Attic Geometrical vases
  (_Jahrbuch_, 1886, pp. 98, 120).

Footnote 987:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1887, p. 48, fig. 8 = Plate XVII. No. 5.

Footnote 988:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1887, p. 46.

Footnote 989:

  See p. 246; and cf. for example _Excavations in Cyprus_, p. 73, figs.
  126–27. For a later Ionic vase of similar type see _Bull. de Corr.
  Hell._ 1884, pl. 7 (below, p. 339).

Footnote 990:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1890, pls. 10–12; 1893, pl. 2.

Footnote 991:

  _Aus ion. u. ital. Nekrop._ p. 115 ff.

Footnote 992:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1903, p. 124 ff.

Footnote 993:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1890, p. 10.

Footnote 994:

  Cf. _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1897, p. 446, and Plate XIX. fig. 5
  (Corinthian).

Footnote 995:

  _Wiener Vorl._ 1888, pl. 1, figs. 2 and 7: cf. Berlin 1651 = _Bull.
  de Cor. Hell._ 1897, p. 448.

Footnote 996:

  It also occurs at Daphnae: see below, p. 352.

Footnote 997:

  _Wiener Vorl._ 1889, pl. 1, fig. 1.

Footnote 998:

  Louvre F 69. For other signatures see Chapter XVII.

Footnote 999:

  _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1897, p. 450: cf. Athens 612 and a Berlin vase
  = _Anzeiger_, 1891, p. 116. On this shape see above, p. 187.

Footnote 1000:

  _Cat._ 473–76. Plate XVIII. gives No. 474.

Footnote 1001:

  _Melische Thongefässe._ See also Dumont-Pottier, i. p. 213;
  _Jahrbuch_, 1887, p. 211.

Footnote 1002:

  Athens 477 = Mylonas in ?f. ???. 1894, pls. 12–4, p. 226 (admirably
  reproduced in colours).

Footnote 1003:

  Cf. _Jahrbuch_, 1887, p. 212.

Footnote 1004:

  Athens 475.

Footnote 1005:

  Berlin 301 = Reinach, i. 380, 4.

Footnote 1006:

  Cf. also _J.H.S._ viii. pl. 79 and B.M. A 762–64, 790.

Footnote 1007:

  _Stilfragen_, p. 154.

Footnote 1008:

  _J.H.S._ xxii. p. 46 ff.

Footnote 1009:

  Cf. _J.H.S._ xxii. p. 66.

Footnote 1010:

  x. 182.

Footnote 1011:

  On the relations of Corinthian and Rhodian pottery, see Wilisch,
  _Altkor. Thonindustrie_, p. 127. The Corinthian vases found in Rhodes
  are roughly contemporaneous with the so-called Rhodian fabric.

Footnote 1012:

  _E.g._ Louvre E 460, 467; Berlin 1156 ff. Furtwaengler, Dümmler, and
  Wilisch call these Italo-Corinthian, but Böhlau regards them as
  Aeolic, Orsi and Gsell as Sicilian. See Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ ii. p.
  422.

Footnote 1013:

  _Gaz. Arch._ 1880, p. 106.

Footnote 1014:

  Wilisch, _Altkor. Thonindustrie_, p. 6 ff., limits these classes to
  three: Proto-Corinthian, Yellow-ground, and Red-ground; he arrives at
  this by combining Classes 2, 3, and 4 in one.

Footnote 1015:

  Cf. Couve in _Rev. Arch._ xxxii. (1898), p. 214.

Footnote 1016:

  Cf. Pliny, _H.N._ xxxv. 16, of Aridikes and Telephanes, _spargentes
  linear intus_. But it is not certain that this passage refers to the
  use of _incised_ lines.

Footnote 1017:

  _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1877, pls. C, D; _Mon. Antichi_, i. p. 780.

Footnote 1018:

  _J.H.S._ xi. p. 173; Gsell, _Fouilles de Vulci_, p. 481.

Footnote 1019:

  _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1877, p. 406; _Italiker in der Po-ebene_, p. 84.

Footnote 1020:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1887, p. 18; Klein, _Euphronios_, p. 68; Wilisch, p. 11.

Footnote 1021:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1897, pp. 262, 265 ff.; and _Anzeiger_, 1893, p. 17.

Footnote 1022:

  _Rev. Arch._ xxxii. (1898), p. 228.

Footnote 1023:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1897, p. 262; _Berl. Phil. Woch._ 1895, p. 202; _Amer.
  Journ. of Arch._ 1900, p. 441.

Footnote 1024:

  _Rev. Arch._ xl. (1902), p. 41.

Footnote 1025:

  _Ant. Denkm._ ii. pls. 44–5.

Footnote 1026:

  _Amer. Journ._ loc. cit.

Footnote 1027:

  It is interesting to note that this form quite disappears, and is not
  revived until the glass vessels of the Roman period. Cf. _J.H.S._ xi.
  p. 175: see also p. 300; and for this and the other shapes, Plates
  XVII., XIX.

Footnote 1028:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1897, p. 265 ff.

Footnote 1029:

  In some specimens Ionian influence seems to manifest itself: cf. for
  instance the Ionic palmette in _Ath. Mitth._ 1897, p. 279. Studniczka
  notes that the purely monochrome outline drawing of the Aegina vases
  is like that ascribed by Pliny to the early Corinthian painters
  (_Ath. Mitth._ 1899, p. 376).

Footnote 1030:

  Plate XVII. fig. 3 = A 1050 = _J.H.S._ xi. pls. 1, 2: cf. also
  _ibid._ p. 179.

Footnote 1031:

  _Mélanges Perrot_, pl. 4, p. 269, and see p. 271, note 2; _Rev.
  Arch._ xxxii. (1898), p. 213.

Footnote 1032:

  _Amer. Journ. of Arch._ 1900, pls. 4–6, p. 441.

Footnote 1033:

  _Ant. Denkm._ ii. pls. 44–5.

Footnote 1034:

  So called from the imitation of overlapping roof-tiles (_imbrices_).

Footnote 1035:

  _E.g._ B.M. A 193, 223; Louvre A 275.

Footnote 1036:

  _E.g._ Louvre, _Atlas_, pl. 40, E 347.

Footnote 1037:

  _Mon. Antichi_, iv. p. 271 ff.; Böhlau, _Ion. u. ital. Nekrop._ p. 91.

Footnote 1038:

  Pliny, _H.N._ xxxv. 16. See p. 306, note 1016.

Footnote 1039:

  Cf. Louvre E 350 ff.

Footnote 1040:

  Studniczka (_Jahrbuch_, 1887, p. 151) connects Ekphantos with Melos
  (cf. the inscription in Roberts, _Gk. Epigraphy_, i. p. 32). On the
  connection of Corinth with Melos, see Wilisch, p. 123 ff.

Footnote 1041:

  The aryballos is also found in early Boeotian fabrics (subsequent to
  the Geometrical period): cf. the Gamedes vase in the B.M. (p. 300.),
  and that of Menaidas in the Louvre.

Footnote 1042:

  See Wilisch, p. 24; examples in Athens Mus., Nos. 621, 622, 640 ff.

Footnote 1043:

  Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 437 ff.; but see _Ath. Mitth._ 1895, p.
  125, and Böhlau, _Ion. u. ital. Nekrop._ p. 98.

Footnote 1044:

  _E.g._ Athens Mus. 502 and 507; Berlin 1034 ff.; _J.H.S._ xii. p. 312
  (from Cyprus); and cf. Wilisch, p. 41.

Footnote 1045:

  See _Él. Cér._ iii. 31–32 B, etc., and Chapter XII.

Footnote 1046:

  _J.H.S._ i. pl. 1.

Footnote 1047:

  Louvre E 600; Wilisch, figs. 47–9. In some of these the inscribed
  names may be purely fanciful. The Corinthian potters were
  particularly fond of idealising ordinary scenes in this way. Cf. for
  Trojan scenes Chapter XIV. and _Hermes_, 1901, p. 388.

Footnote 1048:

  See above, pp. 245, 284.

Footnote 1049:

  Cf. the Dodwell pyxis described below.

Footnote 1050:

  Cf. also the aryballos of Ainetas, B.M. A 1080 = _Ann. dell’ Inst._
  1862, pl. A, and the series of pinakes described below.

Footnote 1051:

  _Cat._ 211; Dodwell, _Tour_, ii. p. 197; Baumeister, iii. pl. 88,
  fig. 2046.

Footnote 1052:

  _Wiener Vorl._ 1888, pl. 1.

Footnote 1053:

  Cf. B.M. B 30 and B 586.

Footnote 1054:

  _Cat._ 1655 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1889, pl. 10 = Reinach, _Répertoire_, i.
  p. 199.

Footnote 1055:

  See Chapter XIV.

Footnote 1056:

  v. 17, 9.

Footnote 1057:

  Paus. v. 17–19.

Footnote 1058:

  Cf. the Arkesilas vase described below, p. 342.

Footnote 1059:

  See on this subject H. S. Jones in _J.H.S._ xiv. p. 30 ff.

Footnote 1060:

  Cf. the Thermon metopes (p. 92).

Footnote 1061:

  _Arch. Märchen_, p. 121: see p. 395 ff.

Footnote 1062:

  See on the achievements of the early Greek painters as described by
  Pliny, Jex-Blake and Sellers, _Pliny’s Chapters on Greek Art_, p.
  xxviii.

Footnote 1063:

  But see _Ath. Mitth._ 1894, p. 510, and _J.H.S._ xviii. p. 287, note.
  The other vases classified in the Museum Catalogue as imitations (B
  43–6, 49–53) are more probably of Ionic or quasi-Ionic fabric. Athens
  655 is in style not unlike B.M. B 42.

Footnote 1064:

  See Wilisch, _Altkor. Thonindustrie_, p. 133 ff.

Footnote 1065:

  Furtwaengler, _Gr. Vasenm_. p. 161, points out that the Chalcidian
  fabrics are not like those of Corinth and Athens, exhibiting growth
  and development, but a small group coming from one workshop.

Footnote 1066:

  _Mon. dell’ Inst._ i. 51 = Reinach, i. 82.

Footnote 1067:

  It is curious that the Chalcidian artists only attempted this novelty
  in the case of helmeted warriors.

Footnote 1068:

  A publication by Loeschcke is in preparation (1904). See also
  Furtwaengler’s remarks on this group (to which he adds some examples)
  in _Gr. Vasenmalerei_, p. 161. For the inscriptions see Chapter XVII.

Footnote 1069:

  The list in Klein’s _Euphronios_, p. 65, is as follows:—

  (1) _Mon. dell’ Inst._ i. 51 (Deepdene): Combat over body of Achilles.

  (2) Gerhard, _A.V._ 105–6 = Reinach, ii. 58, 253 (Bibl. Nat. 202):
  Geryon; quadriga (Plate XXII.).

  (3) B.M. B 155: Geryon; Perseus and Nymphs.

  (4) Gerhard, _A.V._ 190–91 = Reinach, ii. 95 (Bibl. Nat. 203):
  Warriors arming.

  (5) _Ibid._ 322 = Reinach, ii. 160 (Wurzburg 315): Departure of
  Hector.

  (6) _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1839, plate P = Reinach, i. 259 (Kopenhagen
  64). Skyphos: Tydeus and Adrastos.

  (7) Leiden 1626 (Reinach, ii. 268): Sileni and Maenads.

  (8) Durand Coll. 145.

  (9) Gerhard, _A.V._ 237 = Reinach, ii. 120 (Munich 125). Hydria: Zeus
  and Typhon; Peleus and Atalanta.

  (10) _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1870, p. 187, No. 32 (in Florence).

  (11) Gerhard, _A.V._ 95–6 = Reinach, ii. 53: Contests of Herakles
  with hydra and Amazons.

  To these may be added (12, 13) B.M. B 75 and B 76 (both inscribed);
  (14) Munich 1108; (15) Vienna 219; (16) _Jahrbuch_, ii. (1887), p.
  154, note 82; (17) B.M. B 154 (inscriptions Attic, but style
  resembling No. 1); (18) Gerhard, _A.V._ 205, 3–4 = Reinach, ii. 105,
  2 (inscriptions Ionic, but style Chalcidian); (19) Kopenhagen 115 =
  Daremberg and Saglio, i. p. 821, fig. 1026; (20) _Arch. Anzeiger_,
  1889, p. 91 (in Berlin); also Louvre E 793–813 (according to
  Pottier). See on the subject generally Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ ii. p.
  551, and for the inscriptions, Kretschmer, _Gr. Vaseninschr._ p. 62.

Footnote 1070:

  For a description of the shape of this particular kind of amphora,
  see p. 160.

Footnote 1071:

  _Arch. Zeit._ 1876, p. 108.

Footnote 1072:

  On the relation of Attic vases to Corinthian, see Wilisch, _Altkor.
  Thonindustrie_, p. 137.

Footnote 1073:

  _Tyrrhen. Amphoren_ (1898).

Footnote 1074:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1890, p. 237 ff.; Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 564.

Footnote 1075:

  See Chapter XVII.

Footnote 1076:

  See, _J.H.S._ xviii. p. 287. The dance is that known as the ???da?.

Footnote 1077:

  On the ornamental patterns typical of this group, see Thiersch,
  _Tyrrhen. Amphoren_, p. 69 ff.

Footnote 1078:

  Cf. the [????S] (?de??) on E 852 in the Louvre; and see Chapter XVII.

Footnote 1079:

  M. Reinach, in a recent article (_Revue des Études Grecques_, 1901,
  p. 127 ff.), maintains that the vases with this subject are of
  Megarian origin. See also _Arch. Zeit._ 1876, p. 108 ff.

Footnote 1080:

  See for fuller discussion _J.H.S._ xviii. pl. 15, p. 282.

Footnote 1081:

  See on the subject of these vases generally, Dumont-Pottier, i. p.
  329 ff.; _Jahrbuch_, 1890, p. 237 ff.; _J.H.S._ xviii. p. 283;
  Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 564; and above all, Thiersch, _Tyrrhen.
  Amphoren_ (1898).




                             CHAPTER VIII
                        _VASE-PAINTING IN IONIA_

    General characteristics—Classification—Mycenaean influence—Rhodian
      pottery—“Fikellura” ware—Asia Minor fabrics—Cyrenaic
      vases—Naukratis and its pottery—Daphnae ware—Caeretan
      hydriae—Other Ionic fabrics—“Pontic” vases—Early painting in
      Ionia—Clazomenae sarcophagi.


Having traced the history of vase-painting in Greece Proper down to the
middle of the sixth century B.C., the point at which a tendency towards
unification of style becomes perceptible, we must now turn our
attention to the remains of the art on the other side of the Aegean,
among the representatives of the Ionian race and in the centres of
Ionian influence. To a certain extent it is difficult to treat the
subject at all in a handbook, as, owing chiefly to want of material,
the existence of an Ionian school of vase-painting has only been
realised of late years, and it is as yet too early to sift proofs from
theories, or to give a succinct and systematised account of the
development and achievements of this school. The most that can be
attempted is to present the reader with a review of the accumulated
materials, and to point out what groups of vases may be regarded as
exhibiting “Ionian” characteristics, or at all events such as permit of
their being connected together.[1082] It must be borne in mind that
some of these fabrics, such, for instance, as the Rhodian wares, have
not actually been found in Ionic settlements; in other words, the name
Ionian is to be applied to certain styles or schools, in the main
associated with that race, apart from considerations of ethnography.

On one point scholars are in general agreement—namely, that Ionic art
is a direct survival of Mycenaean. This was recognised as long ago as
1879 by Furtwaengler[1083] and by Lenormant,[1084] who pointed out that
the silver cauldron dedicated by King Alyattes at Delphi must have been
quite Mycenaean in character, although not earlier than the seventh
century. It was decorated with aquatic animals and plants. There was in
Ionia no disturbing element, such as the Dorian invasion introduced
into Europe, between Mycenaean culture and the spread of Oriental
influences. The Greek cities in Ionia owe their origin to that
upheaval, but their culture was not affected by it; and their founders
brought their Mycenaean civilisation with them fresh from Greece to
their new homes in Miletos, Ephesos, Phocaea, Chios, and Samos. This
was in the eleventh and tenth centuries B.C., and the Panionion, or
union of Ionian cities, lasted down to the sixth century (when it was
broken up by the Persian invasion), besides stretching out its feelers
over the Mediterranean, to the Egyptian Delta and elsewhere. The actual
centres of pottery-manufacture are not, however, easy to determine, and
much may depend on the results of future excavations. That there was
more than one is fairly obvious, and it will probably appear that
Clazomenae, Miletos, and perhaps Phocaea, played the most important
parts.

As regards the characteristics of the Ionian wares, a rough division
may be made into two classes, corresponding to the buff-clay and
red-clay Corinthian wares respectively. In the earlier, the vases are
always covered with a creamy-white or drab-coloured slip, on which the
figures stand out in lustrous black paint.[1085] The most typical
fabric is that of the Rhodian wares, found in such large quantities in
that island, but not necessarily made there. In the later group the
place of the white slip is taken by a red coating or glaze similar to
that of the Attic and later Corinthian wares, but somewhat brighter.

The principal subdivisions may be classified as follows (the
arrangement is M. Pottier’s, with one or two small differences):—

  I. 1. Rhodian wares.[1086]
     2. Samian and “Fikellura” wares.[1087]
     3. Asia Minor fabrics:
            (_a_) Caria.[1088]
            (_b_) Knidos.[1089]
            (_c_) Larissa.[1090]
            (_d_) Myrina.[1091]
            (_e_) Pitane.[1092]
            (_f_) Phocaea.[1093]
            (_g_) Troad.[1094]
      4. Vases found in the Crimea.[1095]
      5. Naukratis wares.[1096]
      6. Clazomenae sarcophagi.[1097]

  II. 1. Cyrenaic wares.
      2. Daphnae wares.
      3. Caeretan hydriae.
      4. So-called “Pontic” vases.
      5. Developed B.F. Ionian fabrics from Clazomenae, Kyme,
         Naukratis, Rhodes, etc.
      6. Italo-Ionic vases of the decadence and Etruscan
         imitations.[1098]

The subdivision between the earlier and later fabrics is, roughly
speaking, between those with white and red ground, and between those in
which ground-ornaments are used or not. Generally speaking, all the
second class have more in common with the Attic B.F. vases than with
“primitive” fabrics.

Before proceeding to the consideration of these fabrics in detail, it
may be as well to note some of the general characteristics of Ionian
pottery. In the use of incised lines and accessory pigments we may note
two points: firstly, the absence for some time of any attempt at
incised lines, their place being taken partly by contours drawn in
outline on the clay; secondly, the use of white lines or patches for
details. The incised lines, when they do appear, seem to be derived
from Corinth. We may, perhaps, detect their arrival in the vases with
imbrications (see p. 311), which were imported thence to Rhodes; but
another theory is that they were derived from engraved work in metal.
Practically their place had been, and to some extent continued to be,
taken by the white paint, which, be it noted, is obviously a Mycenaean
survival or revival.[1099] It frequently occurs on the pottery of
Ialysos and Enkomi, in precisely the same manner as we see it used in
Rhodes or on the sarcophagi of Clazomenae. Sometimes both the incised
lines and the white-paint details are found on the same vase, as is
seen in some of the Rhodian jugs, or on a pinax from Naukratis.[1100]
The white pigments are usually laid directly on the clay, not on the
black, as at Athens. They are used for flesh tints, but not to
distinguish sex (cf. the Caeretan hydriae, p. 355, where men are
painted white, as on the Melian vases they are yellow).

As regards the ornamentation, the persistence of Mycenaean motives is
exceedingly remarkable.[1101] It is seen especially in the fabrics of
Rhodes and Naukratis, with their wealth of ground-ornaments, and is
found not only in the more conventional motives such as spirals, or
scale-pattern, but also in the vegetable patterns. There is generally
in the floral decoration of the vases a tendency towards the naturalism
of Mycenaean pottery. Animals, when decoratively treated, are usually
arranged in long friezes, contrasting with the Corinthian method of
grouping them heraldically in pairs.[1102] In the human figures
Oriental influence is frequently prominent, as in the hybrid beings
which so often adorn the vases, or in such types as the “Asiatic
Artemis”; or, again, in small details, the conical caps and shoes with
turned-up toes, which recall the figures on the monuments of Lydia and
Phrygia. Oriental costumes generally are reproduced with great
fidelity. As a rule the proportions are gross and heavy, as compared
with the slimness of figures on Attic vases, wherein a curious contrast
may be observed with the characteristics of Ionian and Continental
architecture and sculpture, in which these features are reversed. There
is, moreover, a conspicuous absence of stiffness in the Ionian
compositions—rather, a remarkable freshness, vigour, and originality
quite in advance of their time. Another point of contrast with the
Attic vases is the absence of any differentiation of the sexes in the
shape of the eye, which is always oval (cf. p. 408).

In the choice of subjects the same law may be observed to prevail as in
the Corinthian wares—that of the _hiérarchie des genres_. Mythological
subjects appear first about the middle of the seventh century, in the
Euphorbos pinax. Later we find actually scenes of a quasi-historical
character, as in the battle-scenes on the Clazomenae sarcophagi and the
Cyrenaic Arkesilaos vase. Throughout there is a remarkable absence of
inscriptions, which are only found at the most on some half-dozen
vases. The height of the Ionian style may be said to have been reached
in the seventh century, lasting up to about the middle of the sixth;
thence there is a rapid downfall, due mainly to historical causes, and
the traces of its influence are only to be sought in Italian imitations
of an inferior kind, and in some of the Attic black-figured vases, such
as those of Amasis and Nikosthenes.

But the influence that was exercised during all this period by Ionian
art in general on Greece is not easy to estimate; it is not confined to
the pottery, but is found in sculpture and architecture as well as the
minor arts. There are numerous passages in ancient writers bearing on
the activity of early Ionian artists, such as Theodoros and Rhoikos of
Samos, and their works, which often took the form of offerings of
Asiatic princes to the Greek temples. The Ionic school of sculpture,
illustrated by the early temple at Ephesos, the “Harpy” Monument, and
other notable works, as well as the great Amyclaean throne, which
Bathykles of Magnesia was commissioned to erect, established the fame
of early Greek sculpture in no small degree; and Ionic architecture,
though slower to win its way to favour in Greece Proper, reached a high
degree of excellence at an early period on the eastern shore of the
Aegean. Of painting in Ionia, apart from the vases, we propose to speak
later. In literature and in civilisation generally Ionia was, up to the
middle of the sixth century, far more advanced than any part of the
Greek mainland.

                       § 1. RHODES AND ASIA MINOR

The distinctive pottery of Rhodes,[1103] which, whether of local
manufacture or not, is found almost exclusively in that island,[1104]
represents the union of Mycenaean elements with a new feature, that of
Oriental influence. Although primarily due to the dispersion of the
Phoenicians by Assyria in the eighth century, this Orientalising of
Ionia is purely artistic and industrial, not political, and is due to
the commercial activity of the Phoenicians. The pottery represents a
sort of transition between Assyrian and Greek decorative art, the
essentially Greek elements in which are a survival of Mycenaean
ornaments and a Mycenaean faculty of observation of nature, especially
in the animal world. From the East were derived such features as hybrid
monsters (the Sphinx, Siren, etc.), animals such as the lion, isolated
motives like the lotos-flower and the rosette, and generally a tendency
to imitate textile fabrics with long bands of decoration, in which the
ground is strewn with these rosettes and other ornaments. We have
already seen that these features also made their mark on the Corinthian
style, but they are more especially characteristic of Rhodes. Human
figures are exceedingly rare.

In regard to the shapes a great advance is made towards the classical
types; the parts of the vase are more clearly distinguished, and the
forms are few and consistent. The special Rhodian shape is the
oinochoë, a large jug with trefoil lip and spherical body, decorated
with two or three friezes of animals (see Plate XX. and p. 177); next
in popularity is the circular plate or _pinax_. The ornamentation is
always in lustrous black paint on the characteristic white or
drab-coloured slip, with a free use of purple for details. White is
little used as an accessory—there seems to have been a prejudice
against its use when the ground of the vase was also white—but incised
lines occur more freely. On the other hand, the heads of animals are
almost always outlined in black on the clay ground, a feature derived
from Mycenaean pottery, and interior details are also frequently left
in the ground of the clay, as in the Geometrical style. We have already
mentioned instances in which the two methods are found on the same vase.

The typical Rhodian oinochoae, like the contemporary Corinthian vases,
owe much to the imitation of the textile embroideries of Assyria, of
which we have already spoken under the other head (p. 312). These had
become familiar in Rhodes through the agency of the Phoenicians, but it
is also possible that the Ionians were themselves proficient in this
industry. The bands of lotos-ornament and friezes of animals also
appear on the porcelain vases found in large numbers at Kameiros (p.
127), which are sometimes most elaborately ornamented, and are clearly
of Phoenician origin; the seventh century was, in fact, the time when
the Greek world was most dominated by Oriental influences.

The ornamental patterns on the vases of this class fall under two
heads—the smaller independent ground-ornaments, and the more elaborated
bands of vegetable ornament. The former are best illustrated by the
Euphorbos pinax, presently to be described; in contrast to the
unvarying Corinthian rosette, they show a considerable variety of
treatment, and are partly variations on the rosette theme, partly
geometrical, like the fragments of maeander, or crosses with hooked
arms, which recall in form the ubiquitous _swastika_. The band of
lotos-flowers and buds actually occurs at a much earlier date in
Boeotia, as we have seen, but it is at Rhodes that it first assumes the
characteristic Greek form. On the pinakes a development of this motive,
forming a fan-shaped combination of radiating leaves, is usually
employed to fill in the “exergue” below the designs; a similar ornament
is found on the black wares with incised patterns, and it is the
forerunner of the pear-shaped radiations painted on the small bowls of
a more recent date.[1105]

A typically Ionian motive is the plait-band, found at Naukratis and on
the Clazomenae sarcophagi, and introduced from Assyria. The Mycenaean
spiral, so prominent in Attica and Melos, retires into the background,
or loses its geometrical significance, and becomes a mere vegetable
motive, an adjunct to the floral combinations of bud and flower. The
Rhodian vases are, in fact, the first in which spiral motives were
freely used for calyx-ornaments, as, generally speaking, they were the
first in post-Mycenaean times to raise floral motives from mere
ground-ornaments to independent decoration.[1106]

The series of pinakes yield the most interesting examples of Rhodian
vase-painting; they are usually decorated with a figure of a ram or
other animal on a large scale (Plate XXIV.), the exergue or lower
portion of the field being filled in with a suitable pattern, such as a
sort of fan-pattern of spreading rays or fronds (see above), or a free
variation of the Egyptian lotos-flower. But one is of surpassing
interest and importance, the famous Euphorbos pinax as it is generally
called, which was found at Kameiros, and is now in the British Museum.
The subject is the combat of Menelaos and Hector over the body of
Euphorbos,[1107] a scene from the _Iliad_, but not reproduced in
accurate detail, as, indeed, is seldom the case in archaic art. The
figures are drawn partly in outline, with a lavish use of purple for
details, and the whole of the ground is filled in with various
ornaments, rosettes, etc., one at the top of the scene taking the form
of a pair of eyes, with a conventionalised floral pattern between.
Additional interest is given to the design by the fact that the figures
are named, the words being in the Argive alphabet (see Chapter XVII.).

This inscription does not necessarily affect the question of the place
of fabric of the pinax, as it has been shown that the Argive alphabet
was used in Rhodes in the seventh century[1108]; but it enables us to
fix its date about B.C. 650, and the whole of the Rhodian ware may be
regarded as belonging to the seventh century. It has, indeed, been
suggested that the subject is copied from an Argive metal relief, and
this might account for the unexpected presence of an inscription.

As to the place of fabric of Rhodian ware generally, it has been more
than once suggested that it is to be sought, not in Rhodes, but in the
neighbouring Ionian city of Miletos.[1109] Dümmler’s theory of an
Argive origin, resting as it does almost exclusively on the Euphorbos
inscriptions, is practically negatived by the absence of any similar
pottery in the extensive finds at the Argive Heraion. Miletos, however,
was in close connection with Rhodes, and in favour of the argument is
the remarkable parallelism of the pottery of Naukratis, which was
undoubtedly in close association with Miletos; it was, in fact, first
colonised by Milesian Greeks, and the Milesian Apollo was worshipped
there. But further evidence is needed before this view can be regarded
as other than a mere hypothesis. At all events, no convincing argument
has as yet been urged against the pottery being of local manufacture.
In date, as has been said, it covers the seventh century, being thus
contemporaneous with the Melian and earlier Corinthian fabrics.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                              PLATE XXIV

[Illustration: 1. PINAX FROM RHODES; 2. BOWL FROM NAUKRATIS (BRITISH
MUSEUM).]

                  ------------------------------------

In one of the extensive cemeteries of Kameiros, known as Fikellura,
there were found quantities of a class of pottery which has since been
generally known by that name, but is probably not a local fabric. It
has also been found in large numbers in the island of Samos,[1110]
where Rhodian vases are comparatively rare, and owing to this more
recent evidence the ware has been regarded as probably of Samian
origin. Several specimens were also found on another Ionian site, that
of Daphnae in the Egyptian Delta, but are quite distinct from the local
fabric of that place. The date of the tombs in Samos is the second half
of the sixth century, and it is noteworthy that from the ornamentation
of these vases all Oriental influence has disappeared. On the other
hand, they seem to represent the last lingering vestiges of Mycenaean
influence. The majority are in the form of amphorae, but other forms,
such as jugs and lekythi, are known. The technique is that of the
Orientalising vases, with the typical Ionian creamy-white slip; the
black has a tendency to become brown, or even red, and purple
accessories are employed. Incised lines do not appear, but details are
marked by spaces left in the ground of the clay. The subjects are
simple in character and arrangement, usually one or two animals (or
sometimes human figures) on either side of the body, the spaces being
filled in with palmettes, spirals, or other ornaments. The
ornamentation is strikingly characteristic, especially the network
patterns on the necks of the vases, the scale-patterns, and the bands
of crescents which we also find in use in Lesbos and at Daphnae.[1111]
They form altogether a clearly-distinguished group, but sometimes show
signs of late date, if they are not actually to be regarded as
archaistic. Examples are given in Fig. 91.

[Illustration: FIG. 91. VASES OF SAMIAN OR “FIKELLURA” STYLE (BRITISH
MUSEUM).]

The system of decoration is curiously reminiscent of the Mycenaean
vases,[1112] as exemplified in the great prominence given to the
ornament as the main decoration, the scrolls and palmettes recalling
the seaweed and other vegetable patterns on the former. This prominence
of ornament is always an Ionian characteristic, retained as late as the
Caeretan hydriae (p. 354), with their bold bands of palmettes and
lotos-flowers round the very centre of the body. The scale-patterns,
another Mycenaean legacy, we shall meet with again at Daphnae, where
similarly they cover the most prominent part of the vases. The most
representative series of Fikellura vases is that in the British Museum,
from Rhodes, Naukratis, and Daphnae; there are also some in the Louvre
(A 321–34).[1113]

Dr. Böhlau, in his treatise on Ionian pottery,[1114] discusses as a
class certain vases which, in accordance with his theory, he terms
“Later Milesian.” At all events, they demand attention from the
remarkable way in which they combine Ionian and Corinthian
characteristics, sometimes, as we have seen, on the same vase. They
have been found in Rhodes, Naukratis, and Italy, but the place of their
manufacture is variously assigned to Corinth, Naukratis, and
Miletos.[1115] An oinochoe found in Rhodes, with the incised lines in
one animal-frieze and the details left in the colour of the clay or
shown in black outline in the other, seems to incline to an Asiatic
origin, at least as regards its shape[1116]; on the other hand, the
fine krater in the Louvre[1117] is of a form more usually associated
with Corinth. The upper half of the latter is Corinthian in style, the
lower Rhodian, and thus there is not much to choose. But on the
evidence adduced by Dr. Böhlau[1118] it would seem to be more probably
of Ionian fabric. It may be that further evidence will enable us to
assign these vases of mixed style to Naukratis, always a meeting-place
of styles or fabrics; but it has not as yet been definitely ascertained
to what extent the earlier fabrics of that place are local in origin.
Meanwhile, the group is one that fully deserves separate consideration.
Dr. Böhlau points out that it is characterised by the half-palmettes at
the handles of the vases, by the Mycenaean-like spirals, and the
inferior careless ground-ornaments, and generally by its deviations
from the normal Rhodian types.

The black ware with patterns in purple and white and incised lines
which has been mentioned as found in Rhodes is regarded by Böhlau[1119]
as Aeolic. It is, as we shall see, paralleled at Naukratis by wares
which there is good reason for regarding as of Lesbian origin. The
typical form of decoration, the fan-shaped palmette, also occurs at
Daphnae. In any case there is clearly an attempt at the imitation of
metal vases, the polychrome colouring being intended to reproduce the
effect of bronze inlaid with gold and silver. But before it can be
established as an Aeolic fabric more results must be obtained by
excavation in that part of Asia Minor.

In various places on the mainland of Asia Minor (see p. 62) vases of
early fabric have been found, about which at present little is known,
except that they usually show some points of comparison with the
recognised Ionian fabrics, and may therefore be regarded as of local
manufacture, or at least from some place on the coast of Asia. An
attempt has indeed been made by Böhlau to recognise in these also an
Aeolic fabric, centring in the neighbourhood of Kyme and Myrina. An
example is to be seen in the remarkable vase found at Myrina,[1120]
with the bust of a man painted in outline, which resembles in shape the
Fikellura vases, and is probably intermediate between the Rhodian and
this fabric. Similar pottery finds have been made at Larisa, at Pitane,
and in the Troad. At Larisa and Myrina Böhlau notes vases of the
earlier Rhodian style, and at Larisa others which show a distinct
independent derivation from Mycenaean pottery, especially in the
ground-ornaments. On the site of Troy Dr. Dörpfeld found fragments of
pottery of a Rhodian type with ornaments of pear-shaped leaves, such as
occur on late sixth- century bowls from Kameiros[1121]; also a vase
with a female head resembling that from Myrina, and another of
Naucratite character. There appears to have been a local fabric in the
sixth century—or perhaps even later—of flat bowls with bracket-handles,
on which are painted figures of birds, etc., in coarse black pigment
without any incised lines or accessories; a series of these is in the
British Museum, and others were found by Dr. Dörpfeld (see above, pp.
61, 259).

In Caria the Ionian style is represented by finds at Stratonikeia and
Mylasa,[1122] with ornamentation of Mycenaean character, which appears
to have reached a similar stage of development to the earlier
Graeco-Phoenician vases from Cyprus; many analogies may be noted. That
the Mycenaean influence was strong in Caria is also shown by the
pottery of transitional character found by Mr. Paton at Hissarlik.[1123]

At Temir-Gora (Phanagoria) in the Crimea a vase was found in 1870 with
paintings in brown on buff ground, representing a hare-hunt, panthers,
and other animals.[1124] The style has evident affinities to that of
the “Rhodian” vases, and Phanagoria being a Milesian colony, this is
only natural. But it seems to be a local product, not an importation;
the panther, for instance, is unknown on Rhodian vases proper.

                              § 2. AFRICA

The fabrics of the Ionian school are not confined to Asia Minor as
regards their place of origin. In the Greek colonies which were founded
in Africa in the seventh and sixth centuries we find evidences of great
industrial activity, and in some cases extensive remains of painted
pottery, which exhibit a close connection with the fabrics more closely
associated with Asia Minor. There is, however, one group of vases which
seems to stand by itself, and which, though it may be ranked with the
Ionian fabrics from its use of the white slip and from the original
naturalistic treatment of the subjects, yet shows a marked independence
both in technique and in decoration.

The vases grouped under this head have been found chiefly in Etruria,
but more recently several examples have come to light in the Ionian
colony of Naukratis in the Egyptian Delta and in Samos.[1125] As long
ago as 1881 it was proposed by Puchstein to connect them with the
Theraean colony of Kyrene on the north coast of Africa, on the ground
of the subject depicted on the finest and most remarkable of them—the
Arkesilaos cup of the Cabinet des Médailles at Paris. When, however,
the Naucratite specimens turned up, it was thought that they might
after all be a local fabric of that colony, especially as that place
was known to have had a close connection with Kyrene, whence about 570
B.C. came the queen of Amasis, who was a great benefactor to Naukratis.
But to urge only one of the opposing arguments, there seems to have
been little or no export of pottery _from_ Naukratis, although imported
specimens have been found there of almost every early fabric known. It
was reserved for the ingenuity of Dr. Studniczka[1126] to identify a
scene on a fragmentary cup found there with the figure of the nymph
Kyrene, the patron goddess of that city, and thereby to establish
definitely the origin of this class. Curiously enough, no remains of
the early colony of Kyrene have ever been discovered; but when, if
ever, they are brought to light, it may be confidently hoped that
further evidence will be obtained.

The =Cyrenaic= vases, as they are now generally styled, are for the
most part _kylikes_ of a slender and graceful form, owing much
apparently to metal originals, as indicated by the use of palmettes at
the ends of the handles, and by their form and ornamentation in
general. The designs are painted in black on a slip varying in tint
from deep buff to a pale cream-colour, with firmly-drawn incised lines
and a plentiful use of purple for details. The drawing is remarkably
spirited, and the subjects mostly marked by _naïveté_ and freshness.
The popularity of mythological scenes is remarkable; we find
representations of Zeus, Atlas and Prometheus, Kadmos, Pelops, and
other heroic figures, besides the remarkable vases which deal with
local legend and history.

[Illustration:

  From _Baumeister_.
  FIG. 92. ARKESILAOS OF KYRENE SUPERINTENDING HIS COMMERCE
  (FROM A KYLIX IN THE BIBL. NAT.).
]

The Arkesilaos vase[1127] (Fig. 92) demands something more than a
passing description. It represents the king of Kyrene superintending
the weighing of the silphium-plant, which was a valuable source of his
revenue. Although there were four sovereigns of that name, the choice
is practically limited to one, the second of the name, who reigned
about 580–550 B.C. The scene takes place on a ship ready to sail, of
which the yard-arm and part of the sails are visible; from the yard
hangs a large balance, inscribed with the word sta?µ??, in each pan of
which is a large mass of some substance, which has generally been
interpreted as representing the silphium. But as a matter of fact it is
open to doubt whether it is not really wool, or some similar article of
merchandise. On the left of the scene, on a folding-chair, sits the
king, with flowing locks and large hat, before whom a man named
Sophortos stands, with a gesture implying that he is making a statement
relating to the transaction. On the right are four men variously
occupied, two carrying bags of the stuff tied at the neck; one of these
is named S??f?µa???,[1128] a word of uncertain meaning, but apparently
having some reference to the silphium. A horizontal line is drawn below
the scene, and in the lower part of the circle we see perhaps the
storing of the merchandise in the hold, under the superintendence of an
official named F??a??? (guardian); two men are carrying bags to add to
a heap of three already stored away. In the upper part of the design
and behind Arkesilaos are depicted various birds, a monkey, a lizard,
and a panther, perhaps to give local colouring to the scene.[1129] The
whole is conceived with wonderful _naïveté_ and freshness, so much so
that early writers regarded it as a parody or burlesque of a serious
subject; but this can hardly be the case.

Several other scenes on the Cyrenaic vases merit description, did space
permit; but it must suffice to refer to the list of subjects already
given. The majority of the specimens are in the Louvre, which possesses
no less than ten cups, besides three larger vases, decorated with
animals and ornaments only. There are also four in the Cabinet des
Médailles, of which, besides the Arkesilaos cup, one representing
Polyphemos devouring the companions of Odysseus and the subsequent
blinding (all in one scene) is of conspicuous interest. The British
Museum possesses two or three cups and several fragments from
Naukratis, including the important one restored by Studniczka as
representing the local nymph holding branches of silphium and
pomegranate, and surrounded by flying daemons, male and female, or
Boreads and Harpies (Fig. 93).

[Illustration: FIG. 93. CYRENAIC CUP WITH FIGURE OF KYRENE (BRITISH
MUSEUM).]

Of this series the Arkesilaos cup is the only one with inscriptions.
They are without doubt in an alphabet of Peloponnesian, not Ionian,
character, as is shown, for instance, by the [?] for ? in S??f?µa???.
But this may be explained by reference to the history of the city,
which in the seventh and sixth centuries received a considerable influx
of the Dorian element, especially from Sparta, whose alphabet may have
been adopted for general use.

The total number of specimens in existence is about forty; some of
which, however, are merely fragmentary examples.[1130]

Allusion has already been made to the extensive finds of pottery at
=Naukratis=, among the most remarkable of recent years, which have done
much to increase our knowledge of Ionian industrial art. As has been
said, almost every other early fabric is represented there, from the
Melian and Corinthian wares to those of Rhodes and other Asiatic sites,
including a large series of Athenian vases or fragments down to the
latest times. But with these were present in overwhelming numbers
specimens of an entirely new fabric which could only be regarded as
local in its origin. Of the pottery with figure subjects three stages
can be traced, all characterised by the Ionian cream-coloured slip, of
which the earliest is remarkably like the Rhodian wares, the next is
distinguished by its polychrome decoration on a white ground, and the
third represents a sort of transition from the quasi-Rhodian style of
decoration to the regular black-figured ware, and is parallel in many
respects to the sister-fabric of Daphnae (see below).

All this pottery was discovered in _favissae_ or rubbish-heaps attached
to the sanctuaries of Apollo, Aphrodite, Hera, and the Dioskuri,
especially the two former. As the vases had been rejected as useless or
crowded out by new ones, they are almost all broken and fragmentary.
But it is interesting to note that on numbers of the earlier potsherds
from the Apollo temple the words ?p??????? ?µ?, “I am Apollo’s,” have
been roughly scratched, as if the priests had wished to mark them as
sacred and preserve them from profane uses, although no longer
required. Even more frequent on all the sites are dedications to the
respective deities, with the formula ? de??a ??????e t? ?p??????, or t?
?f??d?t?, in the Ionic alphabet (cf. Fig. 16, p. 139). On
palaeographical grounds the inscriptions may be dated as ranging from
about 600 to 520 B.C., but there are some difficulties with regard to
the date of the foundation of the settlement.

Strabo (xvii. 1, p. 801) assigns the foundation to Greeks of Miletos,
about 620 B.C., but the words of Herodotos (ii. 178) are to the effect
that Amasis (564–526 B.C.), “who was a phil-Hellene ... gave those who
arrived in Egypt the city of Naukratis to inhabit.” If this means that
no Greeks had lived there before his time, we cannot place any of the
pottery earlier than 570; but it does not seem unreasonable to take the
words to mean that the city already existed, and that Amasis merely
recognised the right of Greeks to reside there. Herodotos also tells us
that by permission of Amasis the Milesians independently founded the
temenos of Apollo. From the evidence of the excavations Messrs. Petrie
and Ernest Gardner felt themselves justified in placing the foundation
of the city about the middle of the seventh century, a date which
certainly seems to be required by the character of the earliest
pottery. The disappearance of the local fabrics and their replacement
by Attic importations would then fall about 520 B.C.

[Illustration: FIG. 94. FRAGMENT FROM NAUKRATIS, ILLUSTRATING “MIXED
TECHNIQUE.”]

In the earliest class a distinction, as in Rhodes, is to be noted
between figures without incised lines, but with faces in outline, and
figures with incised lines, the two being sometimes combined on one
vase, as in Fig. 94. It has already been shown that the former must be
earlier in origin than the latter. On the other hand, in the polychrome
white ware (see below) the incised lines again disappear; but the more
advanced style of the drawing and choice of subjects testifies to its
being a later variety. There can, however, be no doubt that the
influence of Rhodes (or whatever was the fabric-centre of “Rhodian”
pottery) was very strong at Naukratis, and if we adopt Böhlau’s theory
of a Milesian origin for the Rhodian wares, this is fully accounted for
by the history of the place. Consequently the two fabrics are very
difficult to distinguish, and, in fact, the difference is mainly in
point of style.

There is, however, a class of wares found at Naukratis which does not
seem to be of local origin. This is the so-called Polledrara fabric, or
black ware resembling that found in Etruria, and especially in the tomb
of that name at Vulci (see Chapter XVIII.). It has also been found in
Rhodes, where black wares are by no means uncommon, some closely
resembling the Italian bucchero in character. It is hardly likely that
this ware is Naucratite in origin, although the Polledrara tomb
contains objects undoubtedly exported from Egypt. Professor E. A.
Gardner[1131] has pointed out that one of the black-ware vases bears an
inscription showing that it was dedicated by a Mytilenaean, and others
have inscriptions in Aeolic dialect. Hence he deduces the theory that
this black ware was made in Lesbos, and exported thence both to Rhodes
and to Naukratis. He also points out that it is really distinct from
the Italian variety both in style and technique, as, for instance, in
the Italian use of blue.

But there is a class of pottery, unfortunately only represented by
fragments, which appears to be developed partly from the “Lesbian”
ware, partly from the early Naucratite fabric, and must certainly be of
local origin. It has never been found elsewhere,[1132] and the
combination of “Lesbian” and Rhodian elements also points to this
conclusion. The vases, which seem to have been large bowls, are covered
on the inside with a black varnish, on which patterns of purely
decorative character (palmettes, pear-shaped rays of Rhodian or Aeolic
form, etc.) are painted in white and red. The outside, on the contrary,
is covered with a white slip, the designs being painted, partly in
outline, in various tints, such as flesh-colour, dark brown, purple,
dark red, yellow, and even opaque white. In spite of the retention of
the Rhodian system of outlines and absence of incised lines, the style
is remarkably advanced, and the treatment of details often most careful
and elaborate; moreover, the subjects are almost exclusively human
figures, although the fragmentary nature of the remains renders the
interpretation in many cases almost impossible. They seem to stand on
the same level as the Daphnae pottery (see below), both in style and
range of subject.[1133]

To return to the vases of “Rhodian” type, a few typical characteristics
may be noted, showing their development. The earliest specimens are
decorated exclusively with animals, painted in the Rhodian fashion,
with heads and other parts in outline and details only indicated by
leaving them in the colour of the clay. The typical ground-ornaments
are the cross with hooked arms, the spiral, and a pattern of diagonals
with chevrons between.[1134] Later, a preference is shown for large
vases, usually bowls or kraters, sometimes also large plates, with
friezes of animals and Sphinxes on a corresponding scale. The Rhodian
style still obtains, with the addition of purple accessories. The
favourite animals are the lion, bull, boar, and Cretan goat; a broad
plait-band or guilloche as border is of frequent occurrence; and in
addition to the ground-ornaments already mentioned, various forms of
rosettes and borders of maeander are found. On a large bowl dedicated
to Aphrodite by one Sostratos (Plate XXIV.), besides lions, Sphinxes,
and water-fowl, two dogs are seen attacking a boar; the drawing is more
advanced than in most examples.[1135]

The next stage in which the incised lines begin to appear is best
illustrated by the fine plate with a seated Sphinx,[1136] where they
are combined with outlined contours (in the head), and details rendered
by white laid on the black, as also are the patterns round the rim.
Another large plate (A 986) has a dance of men and a frieze of animals
with incised lines and purple accessories, but the surrounding patterns
(lotos-flowers and palmettes, tongue-pattern, etc.) are in plain black.

Lastly, there is the stage which forms a transition from the earlier or
“Rhodian” style to the black-figured, in which for a time the influence
of Corinth seems to make itself felt. The figures are painted in black,
which often turns to red through faulty firing, on a warm buff ground,
sometimes with purple accessories. The favourite shapes are the _lebes_
or _deinos_ with flat rim, and the column-handled krater so popular at
Corinth in the sixth century, with flat-topped handles, on which human
heads or animals are painted. Corinthian influence is sometimes also
seen in the designs, as in the Sphinxes of B 100; or in other ways, as
in the olpe A 1534, with a ram in a panel on one side of the handle.
Another curious example is the column-handled krater A 1533, with two
friezes of animals, of which the lower is more Ionic in type. The
British Museum collection also contains numerous fragments (B 102–3) in
this local style, together with a few of other fabrics,[1137] among
which an interesting representation of Odysseus passing the Sirens may
be noted; also a series of chariot-scenes and horsemen, which in style
recall the Caeretan hydriae (see p. 355). The merging of the local
style in the fully-developed black-figure Athenian style is clearly
visible in these fragments, which are interesting from their
parallelism, though not their resemblance, to those of Daphnae.

Among the later Ionic fabrics, of practically fully-developed
black-figure style (_i.e._ with buff ground, incised lines, and
accessory colours), not the least interesting is the group of vases and
fragments from =Daphnae= in the Egyptian Delta, now in the British
Museum.[1138] Like the pottery of Naukratis, they illustrate the
relations between Ionia and Africa in the sixth century, but even in a
more marked degree, inasmuch as they were more directly influenced by
local circumstances.

This pottery was discovered by Mr. Flinders Petrie in 1886, on a site
known as Tell Defenneh, representing the Tahpanhes of the Hebrew
prophets and the Daphnae of Herodotos,[1139] from whom we learn that a
fort was found here by Psammetichos I. at the beginning of the sixth
century. As Naukratis guarded the west of the Delta, so did Daphnae the
east, with the highway to Syria. Herodotos[1140] also speaks of camps
garrisoned by Ionian and Carian troops; and if we might identify these
with Daphnae, we should have a _terminus post quem_ for the pottery, as
the camps were desolated by Amasis about 560 B.C. On the other hand,
the pottery is hardly to be dated so early from its style, and it is
important to notice that it is practically unrepresented at Naukratis,
that meeting-place of all early fabrics.

The chief problem with which we are confronted in regard to the Daphnae
pottery is whether it is a local fabric or imported. Opinions of
scholars are somewhat divided, Dümmler and Endt declaring for the local
fabric,[1141] Zahn for importations from Clazomenae.[1142] The close
connection with the fabrics of Asia Minor, such as the Caeretan hydriae
and the Clazomenae sarcophagi, cannot be denied, and there are many
small details which are peculiar to Ionic vases; but, on the other
hand, there is much that is peculiar to this group and tells in favour
of a local origin. It is also important to bear in mind that the
Daphnae pottery has little in common with that of Naukratis, in spite
of the relation of both to Ionia.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 95.  “EGYPTIAN SITULA,” FROM DAPHNAE
  (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

It will perhaps be convenient to take the groups of Daphnae fragments
one by one, noting the general characteristics and individual
peculiarities of each. First we have a group of tall cylindrical
vases[1143] (one or two of which are completely preserved), of an
obviously Egyptian form, which has been called a _situla_ or pail (Fig.
95). The clay is of a drab colour, brittle, and badly levigated, and
covered with a dark brown varnish laid on a coating of glaze. Owing to
chemical causes this varnish has in almost all cases disappeared,
carrying with it most of the designs, which can only be distinguished
by the incised lines. The figure subjects are confined to panels on
either side of the neck, and usually consist of heraldic groups of
animals or winged monsters. Round the body are patterns of
lotos-flowers and fan-shaped half-rosettes of Rhodian type. The
technique, however, and other points recall the Geometrical vases, and
this is especially marked in one case (B.M. B 104 = Fig. 95), where the
panels are bordered and filled in with ornamental patterns of
Geometrical style.[1144] The whole appearance of this vase, in which
the varnish is preserved, is that of the Geometrical style; the method
may have been learned through Rhodes. On the other hand, some subjects
are of Egyptian type, such as the hawks (B 106_{2}), and the pair of
combatants with their nude bodies and shaven crowns (B 106_{1}).

Secondly, there is a group of tall slim amphorae, of purely Greek
style,[1145] with a characteristic scheme of decoration, consisting of
panels on the neck, usually containing a Sphinx or Siren, and two
friezes round the body, divided by a band of dots; the neck is always
divided from the body by a moulded ring, below which is a polychrome
tongue-pattern in black, white, and purple alternately. An example is
given in Plate XXV. It is important to note here that the white
colouring, of which lavish use is made, is laid directly on the clay,
as in other Ionic vases; incised lines are only employed for inner
details, not for contours. This group is obviously of later date than
the _situlae_, and the points of correspondence between it and the
Caeretan hydriae and sarcophagi of Clazomenae (see below) are very
marked. Sometimes the place of the main design is taken by a panel of
scale-pattern,[1146] rendered in colour only, curiously reminiscent of
Mycenaean vases. Two other points are worth citing here as presenting
the same feature: the two-handled cup with tall stem on B 115_{2}, which
is clearly the Mycenaean type of kylix, and the borders of white dots
laid on the black which sometimes occur on the draperies. The clay is
of a warm yellow colour, well levigated and polished, and the general
appearance of the vases is bright and pleasing. The lower frieze on the
body usually takes the form of a row of animals, especially of geese
feeding; but where the main design is replaced by a scale-pattern,
dancing figures are usually found.

Thirdly, there is a squat form of amphora, with cylindrical neck and
wide body, which has been distinguished by the name of _stamnos_.[1147]
Most of the vases of this form found at Daphnae are of the “Fikellura”
type described above (p. 337), and are obviously importations, whether
from Samos or Rhodes; but others (nearly all fragmentary) are of the
same type as the amphorae. On both shapes a motive is sometimes
introduced which is clearly learned from the Fikellura vases, that of a
row of crescents, which, instead of being merely painted in black, are
treated, like the tongue-pattern, in polychrome.[1148] The only other
shape found is the hydria, of a type differing greatly from the
Caeretan (see below) with its flat shoulder at right angles to the
body; but the same typical wreath of pointed leaves occurs on both (cf.
B 126–27). The list is completed by a few fragments of imported B.F.
vases from Athens.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                               PLATE XXV

[Illustration:

  IONIAN VASES.

  1. SITULA FROM DAPHNAE (BRITISH MUSEUM); 2. DEINOS IN SOUTH
    KENSINGTON MUSEUM.
]

                  ------------------------------------

The subjects comprise several interesting mythological themes: Odysseus
and Kirke,[1149] the Calydonian boar-hunt, Boreas and one of his sons,
Bellerophon and the Chimaera. There is a curious series of nude figures
on horseback, painted white throughout, accompanied by warriors and
dogs; they have usually been interpreted as feminine, but are not so
necessarily, as Ionian painters used white indiscriminately for either
sex.[1150] Dionysiac scenes are popular, but monotonous, and often very
coarse; the Satyrs are of the Ionic type, with horses’ hoofs, and very
bestial in appearance; their place is often taken by grotesque dancers,
as on the Corinthian vases. Among small details the Oriental
embroidered saddle-cloths[1151] should be mentioned, as also the
curious hook (f????) in front of the warrior’s helmet on B 11; both are
found on the Clazomenae sarcophagi, and the latter is typical of Ionic
art.[1152]

                        § 3. LATER IONIC FABRICS

What is in many ways the most remarkable group of Ionian vases is
formed by the =Caeretan hydriae=, so called because they have been
found almost exclusively at Caere (Cervetri) in Etruria. They form a
very homogeneous group, and their typical features are unmistakable.
Originally they were thought to be of local, _i.e._ Etruscan,
manufacture, or even imitations of Corinthian vases. But since the
sarcophagi of Clazomenae and the pottery of Naukratis and Daphnae have
been made known and studied, it has been established beyond doubt that
they stand in close relation to these undoubtedly Ionian fabrics.[1153]
If further proof were wanted, it is to be found in a class of Etruscan
vases which are clearly imitated from them (see Chapter XVIII.).

They were first collectively discussed in 1888 by Dümmler, who gave a
list of fourteen, assigning them to Phocaea; a more complete list of
twenty has since been drawn up by Endt, who to some extent endorses
Dümmler’s views, but is inclined to attribute them to Clazomenae, on
the opposite side of the Gulf of Smyrna, thus bringing them into closer
relation with the sarcophagi. Whichever be the correct view, there is
no doubt that they come from this region, and the existence of a
ceramic fabric at Clazomenae, as attested by the sarcophagi and a few
painted fragments of pottery, is in favour of Endt’s attribution. We
have also to set by the side of this the absence (so far) of any
pottery at Phocaea. In any case the place must have formed part of the
Naucratite confederation, and it was perhaps influenced much by
Rhodes.[1154] That the vases have all been found at Cervetri need
excite no surprise, as there is abundant evidence that certain fabrics
were specially favoured by different places, and apparently made for
exclusive importation.

From the circumstances of discovery of some of them they may be dated
about the middle of the sixth century B.C.; the style is remarkably
advanced, and shows the rapid development of Ionian art as compared
with that of Continental Greece. As regards the form of the hydria, it
is characterised by the egg-shaped body, the division of neck from
shoulder by a moulded ring, the low flat-ribbed handle at the back, and
the high concave foot. Even more marked is the system of ornamentation.
The main design runs in a broad frieze round the body, broken at the
back by a palmette pattern under the handle, on either side of which
are usually grouped two similar or opposed figures, distinct from the
principal subject. The rest of the surface is given over to floral
patterns, which assume great prominence on these vases. The normal
arrangement is as follows: inside the mouth a large tongue-pattern in
red, bordered with black; on the neck, palmette-and-lotos pattern; on
the shoulder, ivy-wreaths or other plants, treated in a naturalistic
manner; round the lower part of the body, a broad band of large
palmettes and lotos-flowers alternating, forming a very effective
pattern and enhanced with white and purple details. An illustration in
colours of a typical specimen is given on Plate XXVI.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                              PLATE XXVI

[Illustration:

  _To face page 354._
  CAERETAN HYDRIA.
  (BRITISH MUSEUM.)
]

                  ------------------------------------

The range of subjects is wide and original, both in choice and method
of treatment. We find among mythological scenes the return of
Hephaistos to heaven, the rape of Europa, the contest of Herakles with
Busiris, and the hunt of the Calydonian boar.[1155] Other subjects,
such as combatants or horsemen, are more in the manner of the
Clazomenae sarcophagi. A curious feature of the group is the entire
absence of friezes of animals. The realistic treatment of the Egyptians
on the Busiris vase, and the introduction of apes and other African
animals into some of the scenes, clearly indicate a relation with that
part of the world, obviously through the medium of one of the Greek
colonies of Egypt. Naukratis, as we have seen, was largely colonised
from Phocaea, and some of the later fragments from this site[1156] show
a parallelism with the hydriae.

Among the smaller details which are typically Ionian may be
mentioned the horse-hoofed type of Seilenos (as at Daphnae); the
four-winged deities and winged boars[1157]; the favourite types of
stag-hunts,[1158] horsemen, and combats, all appearing on the
sarcophagi; the running dogs and the owls on horses’ backs; the
high-peaked cap of women and shoes with turned-up toes. All these
are generally, but not invariably, characteristic of the Ionian
fabrics, as is the peculiar treatment of boys’ hair, which is tied
in a tuft at the back.

In regard to technique the chief point is the extensive use of
accessories, which give a bright and varied appearance to the vases.
And we must also note the general use of white for flesh, of men as
well as of women, the white being laid on the black varnish in the
Attic fashion, and not on the clay, as usual in Ionia. The clay, too,
is not covered with the characteristic creamy slip, but with a red
glaze approaching more nearly to the “continental” fabrics. Incised
lines are used with great care, and folds of drapery are always
indicated; the male eye is always oval, and undistinguished from the
female.

Two groups of fragments from sites in Asia Minor, though differing in
some degree from the Caeretan hydriae, yet obviously stand in close
relation. Of these, one set, forming a large krater of the Corinthian
type, was found at Kyme in Aeolis[1159]; they appear to be later than
the hydriae, _i.e._ about 500 B.C., but the style and technique are not
dissimilar, except that the white is here laid on the clay ground and
the drawing tends to freedom and carelessness.[1160] Folds of drapery
are not indicated; the typical Ionic motive of a large bud in the field
is found.[1161] They may be described as a local differentiation from
the hydriae, representing the transition from the sarcophagi[1162] to
B.F. fabrics, or rather, perhaps, forming a link between the Caeretan
group and that next to be discussed. The other set was found at
Clazomenae,[1163] and appears to stand midway between the Daphnae
pottery and the hydriae; it is probably of local origin, and also
exhibits points of comparison with the sarcophagi. The influence of
this fabric has been traced in some Attic B.F. vases which represent a
similar scene—the harnessing of a chariot.[1164]

There are also various groups of vases (mostly amphorae) of advanced
B.F. technique, but thoroughly Ionian characteristics,[1165] which seem
to trace their descent mainly from the Caeretan hydriae, although the
scheme of ornamentation is widely different. In the majority the most
striking feature is the adoption of the panel-design, the rest of the
vase being covered with black. This is clearly non-Ionic, and probably
due to the growing influence of Attic vase-painting, in which it early
became a marked feature; but it is usually combined with a distinct
neck, on which is a smaller design, and this, on the other hand, is a
non-Attic idea. These vases were all most probably made in the
Clazomenae region; they are, however, rather to be regarded as forming
links between the Ionian fabrics proper and the Attic B.F. vases, and
are the predecessors of a group of vases of fully-developed B.F.
technique which are yet more Ionic than Attic in feeling and treatment
(see below, p. 387).

Among these may be mentioned two groups of kylikes, one found in Rhodes
and richly decorated with figures within and without, the form
suggesting a metallic original.[1166] The other consists of a series of
kylikes decorated on the outside with large eyes (formerly thought to
be of symbolical import), at the head of which stands the well-known
Würzburg cup, with the subject of Phineus attacked by the
Harpies.[1167] This vase bears remains of inscriptions in the Ionic
alphabet; the cup is of a form afterward introduced at Athens by
Exekias, in which the off-set rim and high foot of the other group are
replaced by a wide-spreading bowl of plain convex section, with a low
foot. Once adopted at Athens, this type remained firmly in favour
throughout the R.F. period.

It has often been remarked that inscribed vases are remarkably rare
among Ionian fabrics; there are not more than six at the outside,
including the Euphorbos pinax, the alphabet of which we have seen to be
Argive.[1168] But there are two vases the alphabet of which apparently
belongs to the island of Keos, being one of the Ionic or Eastern group,
and of these one[1169] may well be associated with the later Ionic
fabrics. The other, however, is in a style which is usually associated
with the Chalcidian group[1170]; there is the typical feature of the
fallen warrior with face turned to the front. If the two can both be
assumed to have been actually made in Keos, the geographical position
of that island would account for the combination of these Eastern and
Western elements.[1171]

A complete and detailed list of the Caeretan hydriae and of the allied
types may be found in Endt’s book (pp. 1, 21, 29, etc.); but a brief
summary may also be found useful:—

  1. _Caeretan hydriae_: B.M. B 59 (Plate XXVI.); Louvre E 696–702;
     Vienna 217–18; _Ant. Denkm._ ii. 28 (in Berlin); _Mus. Greg._ ii.
     16, 2_a_; Jahn, _Entführung der Europa_, pl. 5_a_; Endt, figs.
     1–2, 5–8; four others unpublished. See also generally Dümmler in
     _Röm. Mitth._ 1888, p. 166 ff., and Pottier in _Bull. de Corr.
     Hell._ 1892, p. 253 ff., and _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 534.

  2. _Later Ionic B.F. fabrics_, chiefly amphorae, kraters, hydriae,
     and deinoi, from the region of the Gulf of Smyrna: Louvre E 736, E
     737, E 739; Vienna 215; Munich 573, 583, 685; Berlin 1674, 1885,
     2154; Würzburg, iii. 328 (= Reinach, ii. 97) and 331; Reinach, ii.
     156; _J.H.S._ vi. pp. 181, 185, and _Anzeiger_, 1893, p. 83 (in
     Berlin); Louvre E 754–81; Berlin 1676 = Reinach, ii. 22, 3–5; and
     the fragments from Kyme and Clazomenae already discussed. See
     besides Endt, Pottier in _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1893, p. 423 ff.;
     Zahn in _Ath. Mitth._ 1898, p. 38 ff.; Karo in _J.H.S._ xix. p.
     146 ff.

  3. _Kylikes of Attic-Ionic style_: (_a_) Rhodian: B.M. B 379-B 382:
     see _J.H.S._ v. p. 220 ff.; (_b_) later type, with eyes (see p.
     374); Würzburg, iii. 354 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 41
     (Phineus cup) and 349; Berlin 1803, 2054, 2056; Munich 428, 468,
     630, 553, 711, 1239, 1316, 1027, 1239; and others given by Böhlau;
     to which may be added the British Museum cups with eyes, B 427
     ff., and the amphora B.M. B 215.

  4. _Keos fabric_ (?): Louvre E 732 = Reinach, i. 162; Gerhard, _A.V._
     205, 3–4.

There are also numerous vases scattered about our museums which are of
a debased and inferior B.F. type, and on good grounds have been thought
to be of Italian manufacture, whether Etruscan or South Italian. The
former usually display unmistakable local characteristics, and there is
a class so sharply defined that its Etruscan origin is undoubted, in
spite of its affinities to the Caeretan hydriae. A full description
will be found in the chapter on Etruscan pottery (XVIII.). Others again
have more in common with the class next to be discussed; and, generally
speaking, they may all be found to show Ionian affinities. But the line
is not easy to draw: debased B.F. vases may have been produced in
Ionia, as they undoubtedly were at Kameiros[1172]; but, on the other
hand, the extensive export of Ionic wares to Cumae, Cervetri, and other
places may have incited the Italian potters, as in the case of the
Etruscan class just mentioned, to unsuccessful attempts at imitation.

There remains yet one class of Ionic vases to be discussed, a class
which can be clearly defined, but for which as yet no satisfactory name
has been found. Like the Caeretan hydriae, they were first discussed by
the late F. Dümmler; but his grounds for assigning them to the region
of Pontus—whence they have been provisionally styled “Pontic”—have not
found general acceptance.[1173] They were also originally, like the
Caeretan group, thought to be Etruscan, a view which at first sight
might seem justified by their rough execution; but style and other
reasons preclude such a possibility. On the other hand, it is quite
possible that some of them are imitative fabrics made in Southern
Italy. All at present known have been found in Etruria.

The group is formed by a series of about twenty amphorae and sixteen
oinochoae, to which Endt appends a list of twenty or so which may
either be of this fabric or Italian imitations. Another example in the
Victoria and Albert Museum, South Kensington, is illustrated on Plate
XXV. The list might doubtless be extended. That they date from the
first half of the sixth century seems indicated by the discovery of one
at Orvieto, together with an early Corinthian cup. Like so many of the
Ionic fabrics, they exhibit a fondness for bright colouring, with an
extensive use of accessory colours. In some cases Corinthian influence
seems to have been at work, especially in the technique. Incised lines
are sparingly and carelessly employed, and seldom for contours. Among
the subjects mythological scenes are rare, but one of the British
Museum examples (B 57) has a curious subject—the contest of Herakles
and the Lacinian Hera (the Roman Juno Sospita), assisted respectively
by Athena and Poseidon. Winged male figures are not uncommon, and the
typically Corinthian subject of grotesque figures dancing is
occasionally found. But the specially characteristic feature of the
group is formed by the friezes of animals. Of these there are usually
two on each vase, more rarely one; sometimes they are interspersed with
figures of men, not representing any definite subject, but as an
imitation of stamped metal vases (as on the Bucchero vases of Etruria,
Chapter XVIII.). The animals are so characteristic as in themselves to
mark off this class as distinct; sometimes they are naturalistic,
sometimes conventional, and repetitions in one frieze are very rare.

The favourite quadruped is a deer; Gryphons of a peculiar type and
Sphinxes are frequently found, and on some specimens a subordinate
frieze of quails.[1174] On the necks of the amphorae heraldic groups of
panthers or other animals confronted are sometimes seen, varied by
palmette and lotos patterns. The latter form the chief decorative
motive; but a combination of maeanders and stars (see Chapter XVI.) is
often found on the oinochoae, and this, it is interesting to note, also
appears on the Clazomenae sarcophagi. On one of the vases published by
Dümmler there is represented a combat of Greeks and mounted Barbarians;
the latter he identified as Scythians, and mainly on this ground
attributed the group to the northern coast of Asia Minor. But they are
more likely to be from Phocaea, or Kyme, or one of the neighbouring
cities. The oinochoae appear, from the absence of human figures, to be
earlier than the amphorae, and the number of friezes often exceeds two;
there are also a few minor distinctions.[1175]

                      § 4. EARLY PAINTING IN IONIA

It is now time to turn, by way of supplementing our account of Ionic
pottery, to the history of the art of painting in general among these
peoples, so far as it is illustrated by literary records and by
existing monuments other than the vases. That the latter do afford us
considerable information on the subject of painting in Ionia is amply
shown in the foregoing pages; but there is yet another group of
monuments which the material of which they are made would alone entitle
to inclusion in this work, apart from the valuable illustration they
afford of certain aspects of Ionic pottery.

In the light of modern researches, we are prepared to find in Ionia a
great centre for the art of painting in the archaic period. That this
region inherited the characteristics of Mycenaean art has already been
so abundantly shown that we need not hesitate to believe that, among
other branches of art, that of fresco-painting was firmly established
in the Asiatic colonies. The art of which Crete, Mycenae, and Tiryns
have furnished such remarkable examples is hardly likely to have died
out. Hence it need excite no surprise when we read that as early as
about 700 B.C. Kandaules, the king of Lydia, purchased for its weight
in gold a picture painted by Bularchos representing a battle of the
Magnetes.[1176] That such an elaborate subject should have been treated
at this early date, when the vase-painter had not emerged from his
earliest limitations, is, if we may accept Pliny’s account, a most
remarkable proof of advanced art. Saurias of Samos is also mentioned as
an early painter,[1177] who “invented silhouette drawing,” and
Philokles the Egyptian, who “invented linear drawing,” was probably a
Naucratite, and his “inventions” may be reflected in the outlined
paintings on white ground which have been described above. Lastly, we
read that about 515 B.C. Mandrokles of Samos painted a picture which
represented Dareios watching his army crossing the Bosphoros,[1178] and
Kalliphon of Samos, probably a contemporary, painted scenes from the
story of Troy.[1179]

Combining these traditions with what we also know of Ionic painting
from the pottery, we should expect to find that its characteristic form
was that of figures in black silhouette or outline on a ground covered
with white slip; and, further, that the subjects treated were by no
means of an elementary character, but comprised elaborate battle-scenes
or groups of warriors, and even historical themes. Now, these
conditions are exactly fulfilled in the group of terracotta sarcophagi
excavated during the last twenty years at or in the neighbourhood of
Clazomenae, on the Gulf of Smyrna. It is practically certain that all
have come from this district,[1180] and no attempt has ever been made
to connect them with any other site. Further, we have already seen that
there are reasons for attributing some of the vase-fabrics to this
place, or at least for connecting them closely with the sarcophagi; and
thus there are good grounds for regarding Clazomenae as one of the
principal centres of Ionian art.

The sarcophagi which have come to light up to the present number over
twenty, inclusive of fragments, but very few are anything like
complete. There are fine specimens at Berlin, Paris, Vienna, and
Constantinople, with paintings round the flat rims; but all are
overshadowed by the magnificent example recently acquired by the
British Museum,[1181] which is absolutely complete, with a massive
gabled cover, and decorated over almost every inch of its surface with
subjects or ornamental patterns. Its dimensions are: body, 7 ft. 6 in.
by 3 ft. 9 in. by 2 ft. 9 in.; cover, 8 ft. by 4 ft. by 2 ft. The only
undecorated portions are the central panels on the sides of the coffin
and the bottom, but in some other parts the designs are largely worn
away. It is made of a coarse brick-like clay of very hard consistency,
which is completely covered, except on the bottom, with a thick white
slip to receive the paintings. The figures are painted throughout in
black silhouette, without any method of reproducing inner details
except by _traits réservés_, _i.e._ by leaving them unpainted on the
white ground; but the greater part has been imperfectly fired, so that
the black has become bright red.

On the long sides of the interior are representations of funeral games,
such as contests with spears and a chariot-race; the shorter sides have
groups of warriors on horseback and on foot. The chariot-races are also
repeated along the flat rim of the coffin, the exterior and the space
above the interior designs being ornamented with bands of egg-and-dart
moulding and the typical Ionic pattern of maeander interspersed with
stars, which we have already met with in the pottery (p. 360). The main
designs on the cover are in two rows, those on one side having almost
entirely disappeared; on the complete side the upper band represents an
episode from the story of Dolon, the lower an ordinary scene of
combat.[1182] The gable-ends have groups of Centaurs and horsemen, and
along the lower edges of the cover, underneath, are further scenes from
the Doloneia, groups of Sphinxes and Sirens, and bands of ornamental
pattern (rosettes, maeander, etc.). Of the many minor details of
interest in these paintings this is not the place to speak; but they
have been fully discussed by Murray (_op. cit._), especially
peculiarities of armour and costume.

It is possible that the battle-scenes on this and other sarcophagi may,
as Murray and S. Reinach[1183] have suggested, have some bearing on the
question of the painting by Bularchos already mentioned. It would, at
all events, help to explain the selling of the painting for its weight
in gold, if we may regard it as painted on terracotta; but it is not
safe to say more than that the sarcophagi confirm the story to the
extent of showing the popularity of such subjects in early Ionian art.

Many of the motives on the British Museum sarcophagus are found
repeated again and again throughout the series, especially the
battle-scenes; groups “heraldically” composed, such as a warrior
between two chariots or horsemen, or pairs of Sphinxes (Plate XXVII.),
or animals confronted, are of constant occurrence. There are also
various minor motives constantly repeated, such as helmeted heads of
warriors (Plate XXVII.),[1184] pairs of horses, one looking up, the
other down (this being a convenient position for silhouettes), or dogs
running under the horses.

M. Joubin,[1185] considering the group of sarcophagi as a whole,
recognises a triple development in form, technique, and decoration,
enabling him to divide them into three classes. In regard to technique
we observe throughout a remarkable combination of two methods, the
details of figures being expressed either by outlining or by leaving in
the colour of the clay, as in the earlier Rhodian and Naucratite vases
(see p. 331 ff.), or by lines of white paint _laid on the black_. The
latter method, which is not unknown on the vases (see p. 347), was no
doubt used in place of incising, which would have been a difficult
matter in the hard clay.[1186]

In the oldest group, then, the usual method is that of outlining or
“reserving” on the clay; the second group may be regarded as
transitional[1187]; and in the third group, which in style answers to
the Caeretan hydriae and later Ionic fabrics, the use of white for
details, and even of purple, is general. But it is noteworthy that, for
the groups of animals at the bases of the sarcophagi or elsewhere, the
old “Rhodian” method of the earlier examples is retained. This, it may
be remarked, is in accordance with a principle by which an older
technique tends to survive in subordinate decoration, just as on R.F.
vases friezes of animals or ornamental patterns are frequently painted
in the old black-on-red method.[1188]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                             PLATE XXVII

[Illustration: SARCOPHAGUS FROM CLAZOMENAE (BRITISH MUSEUM).]

                  ------------------------------------

In the decoration the development is in the direction of scenes with
human figures, in preference to friezes of animals and floral patterns;
the compositions advance from single figures to large groups, and
accessory figures are introduced, like the dogs under the horses.
Finally, we have the long friezes of figures which are so
characteristic, for instance, of the British Museum sarcophagus.
Mythological scenes, except the Doloneia, are conspicuously absent;
battles, chariot-races, and hunting-scenes have the preference, as well
as the heraldic groups of animals.

Nor is the development confined to the main decoration; it may be
traced both in the form of the sarcophagi and in the subordinate
ornamentation.[1189] The older examples approach more to the human
form, with a shouldered opening at the top indicating the place for the
head; but towards the end of the series the rectangular form
predominates—the opening enlarges, and the upper edge projects over the
lower. The British Museum example and one in Constantinople[1190] are
very elaborate, with mouldings and carefully-considered architectural
proportions. The origin of the form is doubtless to be traced to the
Egyptian mummy-cases, or perhaps to Chaldaean sarcophagi; but the
Cretan cinerary urns (p. 145) are also on the same plan, and may have
formed an intermediary link.

In point of date the sarcophagi seem to extend over the greater part of
the sixth century. We have seen that some present the same
characteristics of painting as the earlier Rhodian and Naucratite
fabrics; others fall more into line with the Caeretan hydriae and Ionic
B.F. pottery. In any case the sarcophagi form our best standard for
determining the sequence and relation of the Ionic fabrics, and at the
same time furnish an argument for regarding Clazomenae as one of the
principal centres of Ionic pottery. M. Reinach is of opinion that none
are later than about 540 B.C., at which time the people of Clazomenae,
menaced by the invading power of Persia, migrated to the neighbouring
islands. But one or two instances of advanced technique seem to point
to a later date.

The list of Clazomenae sarcophagi as at present known is as
follows[1191]:—

                         Reinach’s  Joubin’s
                             List.     List.

    1. Brit. Mus. (1895)         —         — _Terracotta Sarcophagi_, pls.
                                             1–7.

    2. Brit. Mus. (1900)         —         — —

    3. Brit. Mus. (1902)         —         — Plate XXVII. of this work.

    4. Brit. Mus.                7        12 _Ant. Denkm._ i. pl. 46, 4 =
                                             _J.H.S._ iv. pl. 31.

    5. Brit. Mus.                8        13 _Ibid._ pl. 46, 3 = J.H.S. iv.
                                             p. 20, fig. 15.

    6. Brit. Mus.                9        13 _Ibid._ pl. 46, 5 = J.H.S. iv.
                                             p. 19, fig. 14.

    7. Louvre                   10        11 _Bull. de Corr. Hell._, 1890,
                                             pl. 6.

    8. Louvre                   11         3 _Ibid._, 1892, p. 240.

    9. Louvre                   12         1 _Ibid._, 1895, pls. 1–2, p.
                                             71.

   10. Louvre                   13         2 _Ibid._, 1895, p. 80.

   11. Berlin                    1         8 _Ant. Denkm._ i. pl. 44.

   12. Berlin                    2         9 _Ibid._ pl. 46, 2.

   13. Vienna                   15        10 _Ibid._ pl. 45.

   14. Smyrna                   14        14 _Ibid._ pl. 46, 1.

   15. Constantinople            3         7 _Mon. dell’ Inst._ xi. pl. 53
                                             = _J.H.S._ iv. p. 8 ff.

   16. Constantinople            4      4, 5 _Ibid._ pl. 54 = _J.H.S._ iv.
                                             p. 2 ff.

   17. Constantinople            5         — _Röm. Mitth._ 1888, p. 163.

   18. Constantinople            6         6 _Revue des Études Gr._ 1895,
                                             p. 161.

   19. ?                        16         — _J.H.S._ iv. p. 15.

   20. ?                        17         — _J.H.S._ iv. p. 20.

 21–3. In the market         18–20         — See _Revue des Études Gr._
                                             _i.e._

To which may be added:—

   24. Brit. Mus., from          —         — _Terracotta Sarcophagi_, pl.
       Kameiros                              8.

We have seen in the course of this chapter the gradual evolution of
Ionic vase-painting, from the time of lingering Mycenaean influences
down to the period when it ceased to have any existence as a separate
style, and having reached the same point of development as Attic
vase-painting, was soon merged in the latter. It is probable, however,
that this was largely due to political circumstances, which put an end
to Ionic art and industry generally about the close of the sixth
century. The conquest of Ionia by Harpagos in 545 B.C. was the event
which led to this result, and consequently to the dispersion of Ionic
artists, partly into Greece, partly into Italy. The migration of the
Phocaeans in particular caused an influx of Ionian culture into the
semi-barbarous regions of Italy, and contributed to the production of
the imitative vase-fabrics to which allusion has been made.

M. Pottier, in summing up the rôle played by Ionian Greece in the
history of art, regards it as the principal agent of transmission of
culture between the East and Europe, and thus the true civiliser of
Europe, influencing both Doric Greece and Etruscan Italy. Thus we may
see in Ionia the parent of modern civilisation.

-----

Footnote 1082:

  See M. Pottier’s excellent _résumé_ in his _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 486
  ff.

Footnote 1083:

  _Bronzefunde von Olympia_, p. 45: cf. _Olympia_, iv. p. 109.

Footnote 1084:

  _Gaz. Arch._ 1879, p. 208: cf. Athenaeus, v. 210 B, and Pottier,
  _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 487.

Footnote 1085:

  _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1890, p. 378. The painting on a white slip
  marks an important development, and a rupture with all previous
  styles (_ibid._).

Footnote 1086:

  Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ i. p. 129 ff.; _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1883, p.
  179; Dumont-Pottier, i. p. 161 ff.; Böhlau, _Ion. u. ital. Nekrop._
  p. 73 ff.

Footnote 1087:

  Böhlau, p. 52 ff.

Footnote 1088:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1887, p. 226.

Footnote 1089:

  _Rev. Arch._ xxv. (1894), p. 26.

Footnote 1090:

  Böhlau, p. 86 ff.

Footnote 1091:

  Pottier, ii. p. 277.

Footnote 1092:

  Böhlau, _i.e._; Pottier and Reinach, _Nécropole de Myrina_, p. 505.

Footnote 1093:

  See above, p. 254; probably a Cypriote fabric.

Footnote 1094:

  Dörpfeld, _Troja und Ilion_, i. p. 310.

Footnote 1095:

  Stephani, _Comptes-Rendus_, 1870–71, pl. 4 = Reinach, _Répertoire_,
  i. p. 34.

Footnote 1096:

  _Naukratis I., II._; _J.H.S._ x. p. 126 ff.

Footnote 1097:

  See below, p. 362.

Footnote 1098:

  For bibliographies of Class II. see below, pp. 344, 349, 358 ff.

Footnote 1099:

  See _Monuments Piot_, i. p. 45.

Footnote 1100:

  Cf. Fig. 94 below; _J.H.S._ vi. p. 186, viii. pl. 79; and _Monuments
  Piot_, i. pl. 4.

Footnote 1101:

  See Pottier, _op. cit._ p. 503.

Footnote 1102:

  See _Röm. Mitth._ 1887, p. 180.

Footnote 1103:

  See generally Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ i. p. 129 ff. A list of Rhodian
  vases is given in _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1883, p. 179.

Footnote 1104:

  For fragments found in Cyprus see _J.H.S._ xii. p. 142; _B.M.
  Excavations in Cyprus_, p. 104, fig. 151.

Footnote 1105:

  Cf. examples in Cases 43–4 in the First Vase Room, Brit. Mus.

Footnote 1106:

  See generally Riegl, _Stilfragen_, p. 160.

Footnote 1107:

  _Il._ xvii. 60 ff.: see Chapter XIV. The vase is published by
  Salzmann, _Nécropole de Camiros_, pl. 53; Baumeister, i. p. 730, fig.
  784.

Footnote 1108:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1891, p. 118: cf. _Jahrbuch_, 1891, p. 263, and _Berl.
  Phil. Woch._ 1895, p. 201.

Footnote 1109:

  The latest supporter of this view is Böhlau (_Aus ion. u. ital.
  Nekrop._ p. 73 ff.).

Footnote 1110:

  Böhlau, _op. cit._ p. 53 ff.

Footnote 1111:

  Böhlau regards this pattern as “Mycenaean,” on the ground that it
  does not follow the lines of the vase.

Footnote 1112:

  Cf. Furtwaengler and Loeschcke, pl. 21, fig. 188, and _Mon. Antichi_,
  vi. pl. 11, figs. 30, 34.

Footnote 1113:

  See Böhlau’s list, _op. cit._ p. 53 ff.

Footnote 1114:

  _i.e._ p. 79.

Footnote 1115:

  Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 524; _Naukratis I._ p. 50; Böhlau,
  _i.e._

Footnote 1116:

  _J.H.S._ vi. p. 186, fig. 3 (now in Berlin). Cf. Fig. 94 on p. 346.

Footnote 1117:

  E 659 = _Monuments Piot_, i. pl. 4, p. 43.

Footnote 1118:

  _Op. cit._ p. 85.

Footnote 1119:

  _Op. cit._ p. 89 ff.

Footnote 1120:

  _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1884, pl. 7; Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 274.

Footnote 1121:

  See examples in B.M. (Second Vase Room, Cases 24–5). The B.M. also
  possesses similar vases found in the Troad.

Footnote 1122:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1887, p. 223.

Footnote 1123:

  _J.H.S._ viii. p. 68 ff.

Footnote 1124:

  Stephani, _Compte-Rendu_, 1870–71, pl. 4, p. 178; Reinach, i. 34.

Footnote 1125:

  Böhlau, _Aus ion. u. ital. Nekrop._ p. 125.

Footnote 1126:

  _Kyrene_ (1890), p. 17 ff.

Footnote 1127:

  Baumeister, iii. p. 1664, fig. 1728; Reinach, _Répertoire_, i. p. 81;
  and see bibliography in De Ridder’s _Catalogue_, i. p. 98. It is a
  matter for much regret that no satisfactory publication of this vase
  has as yet been made. The best is in Babelon’s _Cab. des Antiques de
  la Bibl. Nat._ pl. 12.

Footnote 1128:

  _I.e._ S???f??µa???.

Footnote 1129:

  Cf. the Amphiaraos krater (p. 319).

Footnote 1130:

  The list is as follows: B.M. B 1–7; Bibl. Nat. 189–92; Louvre E
  660–72; Petersburg 183; Munich 737 and 1164; Vienna 140; two each in
  the Vatican, Florence, and Würzburg (Nos. 2, 4, 9, 10, 13, 26 in
  Dumont’s list); one in Brussels (_Gaz. Arch._ 1887, pl. 14);
  _Anzeiger_, 1898, p. 189 (Berlin); Dumont-Pottier, i. pp. 301, 305,
  Nos. 17 and 32; Louvre E 667 = _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1893, p. 238;
  _Jahrbuch_, 1901, pl. 3, p. 189, and see _ibid._ pp. 191, 193;
  Böhlau, _Aus ion. u. ital. Nekrop._ p. 125 ff.; and a doubtful
  example in B.M. B 58. For an exhaustive bibliography of the subject,
  see Pottier in _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1893, p. 226.

Footnote 1131:

  _J.H.S._ x. p. 126.

Footnote 1132:

  Other examples of Naucratite wares have been found in Rhodes
  (_J.H.S._ _loc. cit._), Cyprus (_J.H.S._ xii. p. 142), and at Athens
  on the Acropolis (_Ath. Mitth._ 1889, p. 341).

Footnote 1133:

  These fragments will be fully illustrated in colour in the
  forthcoming vol. i. of the _B.M. Catalogue of Vases_.

Footnote 1134:

  Cf. A 763 in B.M. = _Naukratis II._ pl. 5, 1.

Footnote 1135:

  A 762. Other good examples are A 764, 790, 792.

Footnote 1136:

  A 985 = _J.H.S._ viii. pl. 79.

Footnote 1137:

  One Melian; B 102_{5} and 102_{29} (with Corinthian inscriptions); B
  102_{13}, 102_{27}, 102_{32} (Daphniote), etc.

Footnote 1138:

  See generally _Tanis II._ (_Fourth Mem. Egypt Expl. Fund_), pp. 48
  ff., 61 ff., pls. 25–31; _Jahrbuch_, 1895, p. 35 ff. and _Ant.
  Denkm._ ii. pl. 21; _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, ii. p. 41; Endt, _Ion.
  Vasenm._ p. 18.

Footnote 1139:

  ii. 30, 107.

Footnote 1140:

  ii. 154.

Footnote 1141:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1895, p. 35 ff.; Endt, _Ion. Vasenm._ p. 18.

Footnote 1142:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1898, p. 51: and cf. _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1892, p.
  256.

Footnote 1143:

  B.M. B 104–6.

Footnote 1144:

  Cf. for the crosses in the field the Boeotian example given in Fig.
  86, p. 287.

Footnote 1145:

  B.M. B 107–15.

Footnote 1146:

  See Böhlau, _Aus ion. u. ital. Nekrop._ p. 65. He derives this
  pattern through the medium of the “Fikellura” vases.

Footnote 1147:

  B.M. B 116–25.

Footnote 1148:

  This is also occasionally found at Naukratis, and appears on a
  fragment from Mytilene in the British Museum (B 99) of Daphniote
  style.

Footnote 1149:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1897, p. 55.

Footnote 1150:

  See Zahn in _Ath. Mitth._ 1898, p. 50.

Footnote 1151:

  Cf. the Xanthos reliefs, _Brit. Mus. Cat. of Sculpt._ i. No. 86.

Footnote 1152:

  See Endt, _Ion. Vasenm._ p. 17, and cf. coins of Methymna.

Footnote 1153:

  Cf. Endt, _Ion. Vasenm._ pp. 5, 13 ff., who points out the similarity
  in subject and decoration, as also in details of colouring, armour,
  etc., with the other groups.

Footnote 1154:

  _Revue des Études Grecques_, 1895, p. 182.

Footnote 1155:

  Vienna 217–18; Louvre E 696. For list of subjects see _Bull. de Corr.
  Hell._ 1892, p. 254.

Footnote 1156:

  B.M. B 103_{14} for instance.

Footnote 1157:

  Cf. Louvre E 739. Also found at Daphnae as a shield-device (B.M. B
  115_{2}), and on coins of Clazomenae (see Endt, p. 24).

Footnote 1158:

  Cf. _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1892, p. 259.

Footnote 1159:

  _Röm. Mitth._ iii. (1888), p. 159 ff.; now in B.M.

Footnote 1160:

  _Op. cit._ p. 172.

Footnote 1161:

  It is found also on the sarcophagi (cf. _Terracotta Sarcophagi in
  B.M._ pls. 1, 2), on the quasi-Ionic vase, Gerhard, _A. V._ 205, and
  on B.M. B 379 (see below).

Footnote 1162:

  Cf. for instance _Mon. dell’ Inst._ xi. 53–4.

Footnote 1163:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1898, pl. 6, p. 38 ff.

Footnote 1164:

  Vol. II. Frontisp.; Reinach, ii. 124.

Footnote 1165:

  Cf. especially Berlin 2154 (Endt, _op. cit._ pl. 1, figs. 11–13) and
  Gerhard, _A. V._ 194 = Reinach, ii. 97. They have been discussed by
  Endt (_op. cit._ pp. 21, 29), by Pottier in _Bull. de Corr. Hell._
  1893, p. 424 ff., and by Karo in _J.H.S._ xix. p. 146 ff.

Footnote 1166:

  B.M. B 379–82; _J.H.S._ v. pls. 40–3.

Footnote 1167:

  These have been recently collected and discussed by Böhlau (_Ath.
  Mitth._ 1900, p. 40 ff.), who notes a total of seventeen. His list is
  certainly incomplete, as some examples in the British Museum might
  have been added. See also Furtwaengler, _Gr. Vasenmalerei_, p. 220,
  who attributes the Phineus cup to Naxos.

Footnote 1168:

  See _Ath. Mitth._ 1900, p. 93.

Footnote 1169:

  _Mon. dell’ Inst._ vi.–vii. pl. 78: see Fig. 111 and Chapter XVII.

Footnote 1170:

  Gerhard, _A.V._ 205, 3–4 = Reinach, ii. 105: see p. 323.

Footnote 1171:

  See on Ionian inscribed vases, Endt, _Ion. Vasenm._ p. 38; Böhlau,
  _loc. cit._ p. 93.

Footnote 1172:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 348–58, 439–50.

Footnote 1173:

  _Röm. Mitth._ 1887, p. 171 ff. Furtwaengler regards the whole class
  as South Italian (_Antike Gemmen_, iii. p. 88); Pottier (_Louvre
  Cat._ ii. p. 538) wavers between Kyme and Italy.

Footnote 1174:

  B.M. B 57; Gerhard, _A.V._ 185: cf. B.M. B 58, which is difficult to
  classify.

Footnote 1175:

  A complete list of this group is given by Endt (p. 39 ff.), and may
  be briefly recapitulated:—(1) Amphorae: B.M. B 57; Cambridge 43;
  Bibl. Nat. 171–73; Berlin 1673, 1675; Munich 123, 155; Vienna 216 and
  Kaiserhaus 278; Würzburg, iii. 79–80, 84; four in Rome (see _Röm.
  Mitth._ 1887, pls. 8–9); others in Brussels, Karlsruhe, and Orvieto.
  (2) Jugs: B.M. B 54–6; Bibl. Nat. 178; Munich 173, 176, 1047, 1291;
  Würzburg, iii. 36 and 40; others in Karlsruhe, Florence, and
  Boulogne. (3) Ionic or Italian allied fabrics: Berlin 1677–79 and
  numerous others in Munich and Würzburg, enumerated and illustrated by
  Endt, p. 55 ff. figs. 27–40: cf. also Louvre E 703 = Reinach, ii. 92
  = Endt, p. 65. To his list must be added the vase on Plate XXV.

Footnote 1176:

  Pliny, _H.N._ xxxv. 55.

Footnote 1177:

  Athenag. _Leg. pro Christo_, 17, 293.

Footnote 1178:

  Hdt. iv. 88.

Footnote 1179:

  Paus. v. 19, 1, x. 26, 6.

Footnote 1180:

  The British Museum possesses a sarcophagus of the same type from
  Kameiros in Rhodes (Murray, _Terracotta Sarcophagi_, pl. 8).

Footnote 1181:

  Published by A. S. Murray in _Terracotta Sarcophagi in Brit. Mus._
  pls. 1–7, and in _Monuments Piot_, iv. p. 27 ff.

Footnote 1182:

  See Murray’s description and commentary, _op. cit._ p. 7 ff., and in
  _Monuments Piot_, iv. p. 40.

Footnote 1183:

  _Revue des Études Grecques_, 1895, p. 161 ff.

Footnote 1184:

  Cf. the archaic Rhodian vases in the form of helmeted heads (_e.g._
  B.M. A 1117, 1118, 1121; Pl. XLVI. fig. 1).

Footnote 1185:

  _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1895, p. 89.

Footnote 1186:

  Cf. _J.H.S._ vi. p. 185.

Footnote 1187:

  Examples of the earliest are Nos. 9–12, 16–18 in list below; of the
  second, Nos. 8, 13, 15 in list below.

Footnote 1188:

  _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1892, p. 240 ff.

Footnote 1189:

  The principal decorative patterns are the guilloche or plait-band;
  maeander, often combined with stars, as on the “Pontic” vases;
  palmettes; a bold egg-and-dart pattern of Ionic type. For an Egyptian
  prototype of the maeander-and-star pattern, cf. Perrot, _Hist. de
  l’Art_, i. fig. 541.

Footnote 1190:

  _Mon. dell’ Inst._ xi. 53 = No. 15 below.

Footnote 1191:

  The following bibliography may be useful: _J.H.S._ iv. p. 1 ff.;
  _Bull. de Corr. Hell._, 1892, p. 240 ff., 1895, p. 69 ff.; Murray,
  _Terracotta Sarcophagi in Brit. Mus._ p. 1 ff., and _id._ in
  _Monuments Piot_, iv. p. 27 ff.; _Revue des Études Grecques_, 1895,
  p. 161 ff.




                              CHAPTER IX
                     _ATHENIAN BLACK-FIGURED VASES_

    Definition of “black-figured”—The François vase—Technical and
      stylistic details—Shapes—Decorative patterns—Subjects and
      types—Artists' signatures—Exekias and Amasis—Minor
      Artists—Nikosthenes—Andokides—“Affected” vases—Panathenaic
      amphorae—Vases from the Kabeirion—Opaque painting on black
      ground—Vase-painting and literary tradition—Early Greek painting
      and its subsequent development.


The term “black-figured” is generally applied to the Athenian fabrics
of a certain well-defined character and a comparatively restricted
period, but in point of fact is strictly applicable to several of the
classes already discussed, such as the Chalcidian and the later
Corinthian and Ionian wares. It is, indeed, in some respects inadequate
as a definition. We must remember that it was originally introduced at
a time when the Greek vases in public museums consisted mainly of two
classes—the one with figures painted in black silhouette on red ground,
the other with figures drawn in outline and surrounded with black, so
that they stand out in red. Between these two classes the terms
“black-figured” and “red-figured” offered an obvious and useful
distinction. By way of illustration, it may be advantageous to make a
comparison between the two main varieties of black-figured Attic
amphorae (see pp. 161, 221), as, for instance, they are grouped on the
two sides of the Second Vase Room of the British Museum, and those with
red figures in the Third Room. In the one class of black-figured
amphorae the whole vase stands out in the natural red colour of the
clay, whereas the red-figured amphorae are covered with black colour,
so as to conceal the whole of the red of the clay except where it is
left to fill in the contours of the figures. In other words, the one
class, which we may term “red-bodied” amphorae, are red all but the
figures; the other class are black all but the figures. There is,
however, an intermediate class, which no doubt suggested the
arrangement of decoration on the red-figured amphorae (see below, p.
411), and which we may call “black-bodied” amphorae. Here the whole
body of the vase is covered with _black_ colour, except a framed panel,
which is left in the red to receive the black figures. It is clear,
then, that this second class of black-figured amphorae approaches more
nearly in aspect to the red-figured, although it does not follow that
they were necessarily a late or transitional development.

But in regard to our definition, it is necessary to reckon with the
fact that there are not only vases of an earlier stage of art which
have black figures painted on a (more or less) red ground, but that
there are others in which the figures are painted not on red, but on a
white slip. In particular we may instance the Cyrenaic vases and some
of the Naucratite wares. We thus lose the sense of an exact contrast
between black figures on red ground and red figures on black; and,
moreover, the term acquires almost too wide a connotation to be of any
value for a system of classification. The term “black-figured” must
therefore be used to some extent conventionally, to denote a certain
class of vases made at Athens during a certain period and with certain
characteristics. The latter may be summarised as follows: (1) black
varnish entirely filling in the contours of the figures; (2) red glaze
(or white slip) employed as background; (3) details indicated by
accessory pigments of white and purple, and incised lines; (4) subjects
almost exclusively human and mythological figures.

The history of vase-painting in the middle of the sixth century B.C. is
largely the history of a gradual centralising of that art in one place
from a number of scattered local fabrics. This was mainly brought about
by one cause—namely, the extraordinary advance in art and culture at
Athens under the beneficent rule of the tyrant Peisistratos and his
successors (565–510 B.C.). Previous to this time Athenian art was very
limited in its scope, and in the domain of painting had so far produced
nothing except the great Dipylon funeral vases, their immediate
successors (the “Proto-Attic” wares), and the “Tyrrhenian” vases,
which, as we have seen, were largely under the influence of Corinth.
Attic importations into Italy cannot be traced until the black-figure
style is well developed.

The immediate result of this advance was to attract artists from all
parts of Greece—not only from Corinth, whose power was now on the wane,
but also from Ionia, whose artists were driven to seek refuge elsewhere
by the encroaching conquests of the Persian monarchs. Thus we shall see
that certain artists, like Amasis and Nikosthenes, infused a large
amount of Ionic element into their productions, just as in others we
see the influence, more or less marked, of Corinth. But one marked
characteristic of the Attic sixth-century vases is the entire
disappearance of Oriental influence.

At the head of the new development stands the famous François vase in
Florence (Plate XXVIII.), to which allusion has been made already (p.
73). Its date can hardly be later than the middle of the sixth century,
probably somewhat earlier, and the two artists Klitias and Ergotimos,
who were responsible for its production, are among the earliest of whom
we have any record at Athens. The alphabet of the inscriptions leaves
no doubt that it is a purely Athenian work, and the technique is also
purely Attic, as are some of the subjects; but there are not a few
small points which betray the influence of a Corinthian artist, such as
the arrangement in several friezes. The winged goddesses, Sphinxes, and
animals are non-Attic, but not necessarily Corinthian. It is, however,
chiefly interesting for its wealth of subjects, which are mentioned in
another chapter (Chapter XII.); with these every available space is
decorated. The style has been described as “dry, precise, and careful,”
the artist as “exact and well instructed.” Closely related to this vase
is one in the British Museum representing the Birth of Athena (B 147).
Although the subjects (exclusive of those on the cover) are only two in
number, the minuteness of treatment in detail and the richness of the
composition show that it belongs to the same school.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                            PLATE XXVIII

[Illustration]

From _Furtwaengler and Reichhold_. THE FRANÇOIS VASE IN FLORENCE.

                  ------------------------------------

In regard to technique, two points distinguish Athenian vases at all
periods above other fabrics. Firstly, the admirable clay, traditionally
obtained from Cape Kolias in Attica, and mingled with red ochre
(_rubrica_) in order to produce its ruddy hue; this clay was eminently
suited for taking a glaze, which was of course an essential preliminary
for painting the surface. Next, the black varnish, with its exquisitely
lustrous sheen, which was brought to a pitch of perfection in the
subsequent period, and always affords such an admirable counterfoil to
the red of the clay, though it has not been altogether popular with the
modern photographer, owing to its reflecting qualities.

As regards the figures, they were seldom left entirely black, though
black is at all times their prevalent aspect. The accessory whites and
purples are used in varying degrees at different times, and it may be
laid down as a general rule that purple is more affected on the earlier
vases, white on the later. A like principle obtains with the
accessories on red-figured vases. In the later examples, moreover, they
are much more sparingly used, perhaps owing to the influence of the new
technique, and by the end of the sixth century they disappear
altogether. The more careful artists pay greater attention to the use
of incised lines, and prefer to produce effects of richness and
delicacy by elaboration of details and patterns in this manner.

At first there is a tendency to use purple in large masses, and even
for the flesh of men; but it is generally employed for folds or
portions of drapery, and for throwing up different parts of animals’
figures, or of the decorative patterns, such as palmettes and
lotos-buds. White is employed for the hair of old men, for rocks and
details of buildings, for the long garment worn by charioteers, and
above all for the flesh of women. The latter we have already seen (p.
317) to be an invention traditionally attributed to Eumaros, who
probably lived about the middle of this century; but whether it was
first introduced at Athens or Corinth is uncertain.

Throughout the period there is a steady advance in drawing, but more in
the direction of carefulness and refinement than in accuracy and
truthfulness to nature; that is to say, that it always remains
conventional. We shall see later that, even after the red-figured style
came in, a certain archaic stiffness still prevailed for a time, both
in the old and new methods. On the other hand, there is a degenerate
class of black-figured vases, found chiefly on Greek sites, in which
the drawing is free almost to carelessness, and it is clear that these
illustrate the last efforts of the black-figured method in Greece in
the fifth century; but the vases are all rough and hasty productions,
altogether devoid of merit or interest.

The treatment of drapery may generally be regarded as a fair indication
of date. The chiton is at first straight, with rigid stripes or casual
patches of purple; then patterns are incised or painted in white; the
waist is usually very small, and often bound tightly with a broad
girdle.[1192] By degrees the lines indicating the folds of the skirt
take an oblique direction, as if to indicate motion, while the himation
or mantle—which is adopted in addition by the women to wear over the
chiton—is made to fall in long formal folds with diagonal edges, known
as pt????e?. It is curious that the more advanced style of drapery is
usually found on the red-bodied amphorae, the older types on the
black-bodied. In the hydriae, which preserve the panel form of
decoration throughout, a progress is visible from the most rigid
severity to comparative freedom.

The =shapes= most frequently employed by Athenian potters are very
limited in number—as, for instance, when compared with the Corinthian
and other earlier fabrics. The really popular forms are limited to
five: the amphora, hydria, kylix, oinochoe, and lekythos. Besides these
we find the krater (usually with columnar handles), the deinos, the
skyphos or kotyle (with its variant the mastos), the kyathos, the
pyxis, and the pinax, and occasionally also the alabastron; but these
are practically all. Some of these remain constant throughout, but
others in their form and system of decoration present interesting
varieties of development. In all cases there is an evident aim at
improving upon the somewhat inartistic Corinthian forms, in the
direction of grace, lightness, and architectonic symmetry.

The different types of Attic amphora have been described elsewhere (p.
160), but may be briefly recapitulated here.

(1) The so-called Tyrrhenian amphora, found in the Corintho-Attic and
“affected” varieties, with elliptical body (Plates XXIII., XXIX.).

(2) The panel-amphora, with cylindrical handles.

(3) The panel-amphora, with broad grooved handles (probably a later
development) (Plates XXXI-II.).

(4) The red-bodied amphora, distinguished by its straight neck sharply
marked off from the shoulder (Plate XXIX.).

(5) The Panathenaic amphora, with small mouth and foot and widely
swelling body (Plates XXXIII-IV.).

(6) The _prothesis_-amphora, a tall, elongated type, used in connection
with funeral ceremonies (see above, p. 159).

(7) The Nikosthenes type (Plate XXX.).

The hydria, oinochoe, and krater almost universally adhere to the panel
form of decoration, but the lekythos is red-bodied. In none of these is
there much change visible, except in the later hydriae, some of which
assume the curvilinear form of the R.F. “kalpis” (see p. 166). The
evolution of the kylix is, however, of considerable interest,
especially in view of its subsequent importance.

Before the sixth century this form was unknown at Athens, its nearest
equivalent being the skyphos, or deep two-handled bowl with low base.
But in course of time two forms of the kylix make their appearance, one
apparently earlier than the other, and probably derived from a
Corinthian prototype. At Corinth the kylix took the form of a large
shallow bowl, with bulging outline and flat lip, on a very low foot.
This type was also known in Ionia, as at Samos and Naukratis. It was
usually decorated with friezes, internal or external, sometimes with a
Gorgon’s head in the centre. The Athenians adopted this form, but
raised it on a high stem, proportionately reducing its diameter (p.
190). At the same time they greatly reduced the surface available for
decoration, either covering the whole with black varnish, except a
narrow red band on the exterior, or else leaving the whole of the
exterior red, but confining the figures strictly to the upper part.
This became a very favourite fashion, and in course of time a school of
painters arose whose practice was either to paint a row of diminutive
figures (or even a single figure, as Fig. 96) on the upper band and
sign their names below, or else to leave the cup quite plain except for
the signature on one side and a motto on the other, such as ?a??e, ?a?
p?e? e?, “Hail, and drink deep!”

These artists are known as the minor or miniature painters, and among
them are found the names of Archikles and Glaukytes, Eucheiros,
Hermogenes, Tleson, and Xenokles. At first they preferred not to
decorate the interior, but then a small medallion with a figure of an
animal or monster, such as a Sphinx, is introduced. Interior designs,
however, were not at any time popular in this style.

The second type of kylix is purely Ionic in origin (see above, p. 357).
It is distinguished from the others by the absence of a lip, by its
low, thick foot, and by the greater width and shallowness of the bowl
(p. 191). With a very slight modification it obtains throughout the
red-figure period. Its form is clearly derived from the libation-bowl,
or _phiale_, with the addition of foot and handles; and it appears
first in Ionia in the large cups ornamented with eyes, the best of
which is the Phineus cup in Würzburg (see p. 357). The Cyrenaic cup
(see p. 341) seems to be half-way between the two types, having a high
stem and a very slight marking off of the lip.

The introduction of this form into Attica was apparently due to
Exekias, who belongs to the middle of the B.F. period, and has left a
very fine specimen, decorated with the Ionic eyes and a beautiful
interior design of Dionysos sailing over the sea (see p. 381). They are
invariably red-bodied externally, and, in contradistinction to the
other form, decorated all over, inside and out. Some of the larger
varieties have an inner frieze surrounding the medallion[1193]; but in
many of the smaller examples the practice is to paint a Gorgon’s face
in the interior, leaving the rest black. On the exterior, not only are
the Ionic eyes generally to be seen, but also the whole scene is filled
in with a background of interlacing branches or foliage—a common
characteristic of later B.F. vases, and supposed to be also Ionic in
its origin.

From the shapes we pass to the decorative patterns on Athenian vases,
which form a link with the important question of subjects. As the
methods of disposing the main designs became fixed, so did the scheme
of subsidiary decoration, until it almost became stereotyped. Thus on
the neck of an amphora there is always a pattern of double palmettes
and lotos-buds (see Chapter XVI.), round the foot always rays or
pointed leaves shooting upwards. The former seems to have been a
Corinthian, or perhaps Chalcidian, invention; the latter is Ionic, and
is found as early as the Rhodian vases. On the shoulder of the
red-bodied amphorae is a “tongue”-pattern bordering the field of design
above, and below the field are rows of maeander-pattern and lotos-buds,
sometimes repeated. The characteristic ornament of this class is,
however, the arrangement of palmettes and lotos-buds under the handles,
which is often very delicate and artistically conceived. A variation is
found in the works of Exekias, who replaces it by an elaborate system
of spirals—a pattern which, as we have seen, descended from Mycenaean
art, by way of the Melian amphorae, to Athens. In the panel-amphorae
the only ornaments besides those of the neck and foot are those
bordering the panels, usually along the top only, and, in the case of
those with large flanged handles, on that part of the vase also. In the
former case a band of lotos-buds, sometimes alternating with palmettes,
is most commonly found; in the latter, rows of ivy-leaves or rosettes
occur on the sides of the handles, and a palmette at the point of
junction with the vase.[1194]

In the hydriae the ornamentation consists of rays round the foot, with
tongue-pattern on the top of the shoulder and round the handles; to
this are added bands of ornament down the sides and along the bottom of
the panel on the body. For the sides the favourite pattern is an
ivy-wreath; but network is also used, and, on the inferior varieties,
plain dots. Along the bottom the favourite device is a scroll of
palmettes, often very artistic in character, the place of which is
sometimes taken by a frieze of animals.

The same decorative principles are seen in the other shapes, but in a
more limited degree. The ornament on a kylix is almost confined to
palmettes springing from each side of the handles; but the interior
designs are sometimes surrounded with tongue-pattern. The panels on the
oinochoae are often bordered with ivy, network, or dots, as on the
hydriae; on the lekythos the ornament is confined to a row of
lotos-buds or palmettes on the shoulder.

Many vases of the B.F. period are decorated solely with these patterns;
but these are usually small and insignificant specimens, with a band of
palmettes or other pattern carelessly painted, perhaps used for the
tomb by those who could not afford more elaborate specimens. In the
tombs of Rhodes and Cyprus small amphorae and lekythi are often found,
the bodies of which are covered with a plain network pattern in black
on a red or white ground.[1195] Others, again, seem to have been
executed with great care, and there is a beautiful example from Vulci
in the British Museum—a jug with a frieze of palmettes and scrolls on a
white ground (B 632).

To treat of the =subjects= depicted on Athenian black-figured vases
within a reasonable compass is not only well-nigh impossible, but
unnecessary, since it would practically be to traverse the ground
covered in another part of this work. There are, however, some general
considerations which must not be passed over. While we bear in mind
that they are as comprehensive in their character as those on any other
class of Greek vases, it may not be amiss to point out in what respects
they vary, for instance, from the red-figured Athenian vases or from
those of the decadence.

The main point of difference is that in B.F. vases the mythological
element on the whole predominates, whereas in the later periods it is
fully counterbalanced, if not outweighed, by the preponderance of
subjects from daily life. The Attic ephebos has not yet attained to the
height of popularity which he reaches on the red-figure kylikes of
Euphronios and Duris, and the softer side of Greek life, the life of
the women’s quarters, or the sentimental scenes of courting which begin
to prevail towards the end of the fifth century, are the products of a
later development of social conditions. Religion, it is true, does not
maintain on the vases the overwhelming importance that it does in other
branches of art, except in a few classes relating to certain cults; nor
has the cult of the dead as yet found general expression. To what,
then, do we owe the preference for scenes from heroic legend, and the
myths relating to the gods? It is, perhaps, largely due to the extreme
conventionality of Greek art in the sixth century, which embodies its
conceptions in a series of fixed _types_, which the artist repeats
again and again from sheer inability to strike out a new line for
himself. But with the general and rapid advance of artistic conception
and technical power at the beginning of the fifth century, the change
at once becomes apparent,—not, be it noted, with the beginning of the
red-figure style, which for a time preserves most of the
characteristics of its predecessor; but with the ripening of the powers
of a Euphronios and a Brygos, who paved the way for the greater freedom
and variety of conception exhibited in the highest products of
fifth-century vase-painting. At the same time an ethical change is to
be observed, especially in the position now occupied by two deities who
are entirely absent from the B.F. vases—the god of love (Eros), and the
goddess of victory (Nike). To the popularising of these two conceptions
is mainly due the preponderance of the sentimental and athletic
elements of the subsequent age.

To return to the black-figured vases, we must now devote a few words to
the consideration of the feature to which allusion has just been made,
namely, the conventionalised types and schemes of composition in which
the various myths and other themes are portrayed. Roughly speaking,
they fall into three classes: (1) subjects represented by one single
and constant type[1196]; (2) subjects represented by two or more
distinct types[1197]; (3) subjects which fall into two or more
episodes, each represented by a different type.[1198]

The question of the _origin_ of these types is a difficult one to
answer. They appear to have sprung, like the fully-armed Athena from
the head of Zeus, in a matured form from the brain of the Athenian
artist. It is, however, possible that the genius of some school of
artists, such as those who conceived the decoration of the chest of
Kypselos or the throne at Amyklae, may have influenced the
vase-painters to a great extent. We have already seen how closely the
scenes on some later Corinthian vases adhere to the description of
Kypselos' chest. It is also a curious fact that the simpler form of a
type is not necessarily the older. Some early types are of a quite
complicated or elaborate nature; and the only variation apparent in a
particular type is that of the number of bystanders watching the event.
This, again, is due to an accidental cause—namely, the surface
available for the painter, who, perhaps unconsciously, took the
architectural sculptures of a temple for his model, and where his space
resembled that of a metope (as in the panel-vases) reduced the number
of his figures to a minimum, or where it took the form of a frieze
filled in the space with a convenient number of spectators, the
original “type” being preserved as a constant quantity in either case.

A question which has always presented great difficulties to students of
vase-paintings is one that to a certain degree arises at all periods,
but more especially in the one under discussion—namely, the difficulty
of deciding whether certain subjects have a mythological meaning or
not. The difficulty is, of course, in the first instance, due to the
type-system. If the artist wished to depict a marriage procession in
daily life, he instinctively had recourse to a familiar scheme for the
purpose—namely, the “chariot-procession” type consecrated to the
marriage of Zeus and Hera and similar Olympian triumphs. Or, again,
scenes of warriors departing to battle or engaged in the fray would
naturally be copied from such familiar types as that of Hector parting
from his wife and child, or the fight of Achilles and Memnon over the
body of Antilochos. Even inscriptions do not lend the aid that might be
expected, as in some cases they are wrongly applied, or the names
convey no meaning (as on the Corinthian vases, see pp. 315, 318); and
it is probable that in many cases the intention was just to produce a
sort of parable or idealised picture of events of ordinary life, in
order to give more interest to a theme.[1199]

Much of the interest of Athenian vases is derived from the inscriptions
found upon them. These, which will be more fully dealt with elsewhere
(Chapter XVII.), fall into three main classes—artists’ signatures,
names with ?a???, and descriptive names referring to the designs. On
the last-named head no more need now be said; the second is more
appropriately dealt with in the next chapter[1200]—although not a few
?a???-names are found on B.F. vases; and it only remains therefore to
treat of the artists whose signatures have come down to us.[1201]

We have already met with a few signed vases, among those of Corinth and
Boeotia, of which the earliest go back to the beginning of the seventh
century. Those of undoubtedly Attic origin fall into three or four main
groups, the representative names in which may here be given.[1202]

(1) Early artists:

  Klitias and Ergotimos, Taleides, Sophilos, Oikopheles.

(2) Middle period:

  Amasis, Exekias, Kolchos, Nearchos, Timagoras, Tychios.

(3) Minor artists, who painted kylikes almost exclusively:

  Archikles, Eucheiros, Glaukytes, Hermogenes, Phrynos, Tleson,
  Xenokles, Sakonides.

(4) Later artists, combining B.F. and R.F. methods, or painting in
transitional style:

  Andokides, Charinos, Nikosthenes, Pamphaios, Hischylos and Epiktetos,
  Pasiades.

Kittos, who painted in black figures a Panathenaic amphora of the later
class (see p. 391), belongs to the middle of the fourth century.

Most of these artists use the formula ?p???se,[1203] implying that the
same man both made and painted the vase; but Exekias in two cases (see
below) says ???a?e ??p???se. The François vase, as we have seen,
records the names both of painter and artist. Some of these painters
give the name of their father, and thus we learn that Eucheiros (Class
3) was the son of Ergotimos (Class 1), Tleson (Class 3) the son of
Nearchos (Class 2). The names Andokides and Nearchos are found among
the dedications on the Athenian Acropolis. We now proceed to speak of
these artists in detail.

In Class 1 Sophilos appears as the maker of a vase of which fragments
were found on the Athenian Acropolis.[1204] In style it closely
resembles the François vase, and its subject also appears to have been
akin—the marriage of Peleus and Thetis—to judge from the figures of
Horae still visible. Taleides, whose work is of early character,
painted an amphora representing Theseus slaying the Minotaur and two
men weighing goods in a balance.[1205] Ergotimos, besides the François
vase, signed a kylix found in Aegina, and now in Berlin,[1206] with
interior and exterior subjects.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                              PLATE XXIX

[Illustration:

  ATTIC BLACK-FIGURED AMPHORAE (BRITISH MUSEUM).

  1. IN STYLE OF EXEKIAS; 2. IN “AFFECTED” STYLE.
]

                  ------------------------------------

In the next group are two very interesting names, those of Amasis and
Exekias, and both demand special attention, the latter for the
excellence of his work, the former as connected with a special branch
of Attic B.F. vases, which must be treated by themselves. The vases of
=Exekias= include four amphorae, four cups (see Fig. 96), and two
fragments, together with a few unsigned vases which for various reasons
may be attributed to him.[1207] The finest of his works is an amphora
in the Vatican,[1208] on one side of which are Ajax and Achilles
playing draughts, the one calling out [??S???] “four!” the other [????]
“three!”[1209] On the reverse are the Dioskuri, with Tyndareus and
Leda. Besides the signature in iambic form

                  29[400]??S????S ?G??FS? ??? ????S???
                    ?????a? ???afse ?a? ’p???s? µe,

the vase is inscribed with the ?a???-name Onetorides. The others are in
the British Museum (B 210), the Louvre (F 53), and Berlin (1720)
respectively, and are all painted with mythological subjects. A
fragment of a _deinos_[1210] is interesting, as having, besides the
signature, an iambic line in the alphabet of Sikyon (see Chapter
XVII.). Among the four cups, one in Munich (339) is a masterpiece of
its kind. It is of the later form of B.F. kylix (see p. 374), and
represents on the inside Dionysos in a ship which takes the form of a
fish, the mast and yard overgrown with the vine; on the exterior are
large eyes and groups of warriors. The other three are of the earlier
“Kleinmeister” type, and two are merely signed, without subject.

[Illustration: FIG. 96. KYLIX BY EXEKIAS: “MINOR ARTIST” TYPE.]

Exekias may be regarded as one of the most typical B.F. artists. His
subjects are mostly from the usual stock-in-trade of the time, but
distinguished above other examples by the care and accuracy displayed
in every detail, especially in the extraordinary delicacy and
minuteness of the incising and the judicious but sparing use of
accessory colour, as also by the careful naming of the figures in
almost all cases. He stands midway between Klitias of the François vase
and the transitional work of Andokides and Pamphaios, and helps to
carry on the tradition of minuteness and accuracy in detail
characteristic of all these artists.

=Amasis= is an artist of similar calibre and temperament. His style is
more individual than that of any B.F. artist, and hence it is possible
to attribute to him many vases which he has not signed. It is marked,
like that of Exekias, by accuracy of drawing and careful and delicate
work in details[1211]; but his subjects are more monotonous and his
figures much more rigid and conventional. There is much in his vases
which suggests a connection with Ionia, especially with the later
fabrics discussed above (p. 356); and this point has been well brought
out by Karo.[1212] We have seven signed vases from his hand, of which
no less than four are jugs of a characteristic form—a form not unknown
in Ionic fabrics,[1213] but usually found among the later Corinthian
wares. It is of the form known as _olpe_, with the design in a panel,
on the right side of the handle only. An example of his work is given
in Fig. 97.

[Illustration: FIG. 97. PERSEUS SLAYING MEDUSA: FROM AN OLPE BY AMASIS
(BRITISH MUSEUM).]

It has been thought by more than one writer that he must have been a
foreigner. The name, of course, suggests Egypt, and his Ionic
affinities would further suggest Naukratis or Daphnae as his home; but
he may well have come from Asia Minor.[1214] His best-known work is the
fine amphora in the Bibliothèque Nationale at Paris (222), with a
representation of Athena and Poseidon, and among the _olpae_, one in
the British Museum (B 471), with Perseus slaying Medusa (Fig. 97), and
one in the Louvre (F 30), with Herakles’ reception by the Olympian
deities.[1215]

Of the other artists in this group, Nearchos is only represented by a
fragmentary vase from the Athenian Acropolis[1216]; Timagoras was the
artist of two fine hydriae in the Louvre (F 38–9), one representing
Herakles wrestling with the fish-bodied Triton; Tychios has also signed
a hydria; Kolchos is only known from one vase, but that a very fine jug
with the combat of Herakles and Kyknos (Berlin 1732). The design on the
last-named is not, as usual, confined to a panel, but is continued all
round the body.

The list of “Kleinmeister,” or minor artists, is a long one,[1217] but
few individual names are of importance. The most prolific is _Tleson_,
whose name appears on no fewer than forty cups, fourteen of which have
no design, but only the signature on either side. Others have a design
in the interior only, such as a Sphinx or Siren; others, again, a
figure of an animal—a cock, hen, or ram—on either side above the
signature. Seventeen are ascribed to _Hermogenes_, nine with signature
only, and thirteen to _Xenokles_, of which eight have no design. But
that Xenokles sometimes had larger aims is shown by two of the cups in
the British Museum and the Deepdene collection, as well as by an
oinochoe which he made for the painter Kleisophos to decorate. The
Museum cup (B 425) has on one side the three cosmic deities Zeus,
Poseidon, and Hades; on the other a subject of four figures which may
be interpreted as the return of Persephone from Hades. The Deepdene
cup[1218] has in the interior the procession of the goddesses to the
Judgment of Paris, and on the exterior Herakles with Kerberos and
Achilles’ pursuit of Troilos. _Phrynos_, an artist of similar style,
has one cup (B.M. B 424) with the Birth of Athena and the reception of
Herakles in Olympos, the figures being very diminutive, as are those on
the British Museum Xenokles cup. _Eucheiros_ and _Sakonides_[1219] show
a preference for a female bust painted in outline on either side of the
cup, as does also Hermogenes.[1220] _Archikles_ and _Glaukytes_ are
associated on a fine cup in Munich (333), which is remarkable for the
number of figures each side, the style being very minute and detailed.
On one side is Theseus slaying the Minotaur, on the other the hunt of
the Calydonian boar, appropriate figures being added each side to fill
in the spaces at the ends of the friezes. There are seventeen figures
in the first scene, and, exclusive of animals, nine in the latter. A
similar cup in the British Museum (B 400), with continuous frieze,
representing a battle (twenty fighters, three chariots), is signed by
Glaukytes alone. Other names are Anakles, Charitaios, Ergoteles,
Epitimos, Myspios, Neandros, Psoieas, Sokles, Sondros, Thrax, and
Tlenpolemos.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                               PLATE XXX

[Illustration:

  VASES BY NIKOSTHENES (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

                  ------------------------------------

In the fourth class we are introduced to a very interesting
personality, that of =Nikosthenes=, the most prolific of all Greek
vase-painters known to us, and of the B.F. artists by far the most
original.[1221] He was, however, a potter rather than a painter, and on
many of his vases the designs are little more than decorative motives.
He favoured vases of metallic form,[1222] such as the _phiale_
_mesomphalos_, and invented a peculiar type of amphora, also derived
from a metallic origin, with broad, flat handles and slim body, with
moulded rings dividing the subjects (see Plate XXX.). Altogether,
seventy-eight examples with his signature are known, of which
forty-eight, or nearly two-thirds, are amphorae, nineteen are cups,
four jugs, and one a krater. To these must be added two cups in mixed
B.F. and R.F. technique, one made for Epiktetos, and three kanthari in
the R.F. method, of which he was probably only the potter. That he had
affinities with the “minor artists” is shown by his making a cup with
Anakles, as also by the style of some of his paintings[1223]; while
some of his cups have only the signature.

The amphorae are all very much alike, with subjects of a simple
character—Sphinxes and Sirens, combats of warriors or boxers, Satyrs
and Maenads dancing, and Herakles with the Nemean lion, a subject of
which he seems to have been especially fond. The large krater in the
British Museum (B 364) is interesting as an early example of the form
with volute handles, and for the manner of its decoration, with a
narrow band of minute figures on the neck only. In the Louvre there are
two elegant jugs representing the reception of Herakles in Olympos (F
116–17), the figures being painted on a white slip in the Ionic
manner.[1224] This point is important, because it has been held by many
writers that Nikosthenes was of Ionian origin, and introduced the
white-slip method at Athens. Attempts have even been made to connect
him with Naukratis. The jug figured on Plate XXX. is similar to those
in the Louvre, and is probably also Nikosthenes’ handiwork.[1225]

Whether this view can be maintained or not, there is no doubt that
towards the end of the sixth century the practice of using a white slip
does appear at Athens for vases with black figures, and it is quite
reasonable to associate its introduction with a versatile and original
artist like Nikosthenes. But the consideration of this style of
painting must be reserved for a later page (p. 455).

Pamphaios and Epiktetos, with their associates Hischylos, Pheidippos,
and Chelis, must, on the whole, be regarded as belonging to the R.F.
period, the majority of their works being purely in that style; they
will therefore be considered under a subsequent heading. But the case
of the remaining name in our fourth class, that of =Andokides=, is
somewhat different. Among the signed examples we have from his hand
only one is purely B.F., three are in mixed style, and two are purely
R.F. It is clear, then, that he represents, better than any other
artist, the intermediate stage between the two styles, more especially
as a whole series of amphorae can be attributed to him in which the two
are combined, sometimes in what has been called “bilingual”
fashion—that is to say, that the design on both sides of the vase is
identical, except for the variation of technique.[1226]

There are, then, six vases signed by Andokides, of which one is a
kylix, the rest amphorae with designs in panels and broad grooved
handles. The B.F. amphora represents a chariot seen from the front, in
very minute, careful style.[1227] One of the “mixed” amphorae (Louvre F
203) has three Amazons preparing for battle (B.F.), and women in the
bath, one of whom is swimming, another diving (R.F.) [1228]; the other,
a Dionysiac B.F. scene, and Apollo, Artemis, Leto, and Ares on the R.F.
side. The “mixed” kylix[1229] is a remarkable example of the
counterchanging principle, the two halves of the exterior being exactly
reversed in technique, the dividing-line passing under the
handles.[1230] Of the two R.F. amphorae, one in Berlin represents the
contest for the tripod and a pair of wrestlers; the other, in the
Louvre, a combat and a musical contest.[1231]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                              PLATE XXXI

[Illustration:

  AMPHORA IN STYLE OF ANDOKIDES (BRITISH MUSEUM).
  OBV.: HEROES PLAYING DRAUGHTS.
]

                  ------------------------------------
         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                             PLATE XXXII

[Illustration:

  AMPHORA IN STYLE OF ANDOKIDES (BRITISH MUSEUM).
  REV.: HERAKLES WITH NEMEAN LION.
]

                  ------------------------------------

The characteristics of Andokides’ work are freedom of composition,
delicacy of drawing,[1232] and wealth of detail; but he is always bound
by conventionalities, and his power of observation is stronger than his
power of correct delineation. Furtwaengler thinks his combinations of
B.F. and R.F. were deliberately chosen to show the superiority of the
latter.[1233] His date may be placed about 525 B.C., and it is probable
that his name appears on a marble base found on the Acropolis of
Athens. He seems to have learnt his art either from Exekias or Amasis,
probably the latter.

Scholars are generally agreed in attributing to him the series of
“bilingual” amphorae already mentioned, of which the most notable
examples are one in Munich (388) representing Herakles banqueting, and
one in Boston with Herakles and a bull.[1234] Even more probable is the
attribution to his hand of some half-dozen amphorae of the type which
he employed, with _different_ designs on either side, but B.F. and R.F.
respectively. The most interesting of these is an amphora in the
British Museum (B 193 = Plates XXXI.-II.), with the typical B.F.
representation of warriors playing with _pessi_ on one side, quite in
the manner of Exekias (see above), and on the other Herakles with the
Nemean lion, in which scene the painter has attempted a new departure.
The lion is already subdued, and the hero carries it in triumph on his
shoulder, no doubt with a reminiscence of the Erymanthian boar types
(see Chapter XIV.).[1235]

                  *       *       *       *       *

A curious group of B.F. vases found exclusively in Italy, and belonging
apparently to the middle of the sixth century, is marked by the
extremes to which the mannerisms of the artists Exekias and Amasis are
carried. They are without exception amphorae, and so similar in style
that they must all have been produced by one workshop, if not one hand.
In spite of the excellence of technique and careful drawing which they
exhibit, showing a really advanced stage of B.F. vase-painting, they
are lifeless and monotonous almost to grotesqueness. Karo, in
publishing the series,[1236] reckons forty-four in all, and points out
the various Ionian peculiarities they present, which mark them either
as an offshoot of the school of Amasis or a parallel development.
Originally known as “Tyrrhenian,” from the form of the amphora (cf. p.
160), they are now generally spoken of as “affected amphorae,” in
allusion to their peculiar and mannered style. An example is given on
Plate XXIX.

The subjects are all dull repetitions of certain “types,” often without
any apparent meaning, the personages being usually warriors, horsemen,
or ordinary draped figures, young and old. Women are rarely seen;
subjects of a Dionysiac character are occasionally found, but
mythological scenes never, except that the “type” of the “Birth of
Athena” is borrowed, copied, and divested of all meaning by omitting
the figure of the goddess and depriving the others of their
attributes.[1237] In addition to this, Karo notes six prevailing
motives: (1) two men in animated discourse, occurring about forty
times; (2) a warrior arming, putting on a greave; (3) a warrior
conversing with another man, with spectators; (4) two warriors in
combat; (5) a young rider with second horse (Troilos?); (6) a reception
of a guest, sometimes, but rather doubtfully, identified as Ikarios
receiving Dionysos (see Chapter XIV.).

The complete absence of inscriptions is an Ionic feature as are the
ornamental patterns, such as the tongue-pattern round the handles; the
fondness for winged figures also points in this direction. The
combination of good technique with feeble compositions points to a late
and imitative stage, and is contrary to the Attic tendency to prefer
new ideas and new subjects to a high standard of technique. Among other
characteristic details we may note the tendency to give the human
figures tapering extremities, common to all archaic art, but here
greatly exaggerated; also the elaborate ornamentation of the draperies
with purple and white flowers or rosettes.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The =Panathenaic amphorae=, of which some mention has already been made
elsewhere (pp. 48, 132), form one of the most interesting groups of
black-figured vases.[1238] The Panathenaic games, which were celebrated
in the third year of each Olympiad, were traditionally attributed to
Theseus, but at any rate were reconstituted by Peisistratos about 566
B.C., when rhapsodic contests were introduced. To these musical
contests with flute and lyre were added in 456 by Pericles. The prizes
were, as we know from Pindar, painted amphorae containing olive oil,
and there is an interesting inscription[1239] which gives the number
assigned as prizes for each contest. Thus, for the pentathlon, the
first prize was 40 amphorae, the second 8; for the chariot-race, the
first 104, the second 40; for the foot-race, the first 50 to 60, the
second 10 to 12.[1240] That these vases were greatly valued and buried
in tombs we know from the number found under such circumstances. About
130 in all are in existence.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                            PLATE XXXIII

[Illustration:

  PANATHENAIC AMPHORA (BRITISH MUSEUM).
  EARLIER TYPE (OBV. AND REV.).
]

                  ------------------------------------

The shape of the sixth-century amphora is peculiar, but not exclusively
used for this class[1241]; in height they vary from twenty-five inches
to about eight inches. Towards the end of the century, and during the
fifth, other forms were sometimes employed, that of the red-bodied
amphora and even the “Nolan” being found. In the fourth century a great
change took place, the height being greatly increased and the body
becoming proportionately slim; the form exactly resembles that of the
contemporary Apulian sepulchral amphorae (Fig. 30, p. 162), with the
addition of a conical cover. After the end of the fourth century they
appear to have been made only of metal, but that they continued to be
made we know both from literature and monuments, such as the Athenian
coins.

The designs are always in panels, the obverse representing the goddess
to whom the games were sacred, in her character of Athena Promachos;
the reverse, the contest in which the prize was won (see Plates
XXXIII.-IV.). Athena is represented standing to the left, with crested
helmet, spear raised aloft in right hand, and shield on left arm,
adorned with an emblematic device; her drapery is usually much
ornamented. Except in the earliest examples there is a Doric column on
either side of her, surmounted by a cock, as the bird sacred to Agon,
the god of athletic contests; sometimes in place of it a Sphinx, Siren,
panther, or vase. In the fourth century we sometimes find a figure of
Nike or Triptolemos in his car surmounting the columns. Down the side
of the left-hand column is usually placed the inscription (always
preserving an archaic form): [??? ?[T]???[T]?? ?[T]???], t?? ???????e?
?????, “(a prize) from the games at Athens.” On the earliest known, the
Burgon amphora (B.M. B 130), the word [???] is added. In the fourth
century the inscription still reads down the side of the column, but
the letters are placed parallel to it, not at right angles. Further, in
this period it often becomes customary to add on the right-hand side
the name of the archon in whose year of office the games were held,
thus enabling us to date the vase exactly.[1242] Of these, some ten
examples are known, ranging from 367 to 313 B.C., the list being as
follows:—

      Polyzelos    367 B.C. B.M. B 603         Found at Teucheira,
                                                        Cyrenaica
      Themistokles 347  ”   Athens Mus.           ”     Athens
      Pythodelos   336  ”   B.M. B 607 and 608    ”     Cervetri
      Nikokrates   333  ”   B.M. B 609            ”     Benghazi
      Niketes      332  ”   B.M. B 610            ”     Capua
      Euthykritos  328  ”   B.M. B 611            ”     Teucheira
      Hegesias     324  ”   Louvre                ”     Benghazi
      Kephisodoros 323  ”   Louvre                ”     Benghazi
      Archippos    321  ”   Louvre                ”     Benghazi
      Theophrastos 313  ”   Louvre                ”     Benghazi

The contests represented include the pentathlon, chariot-race,
foot-race, armed foot-race, torch-race, tilting on horseback, the
pa????t???, and musical contests (see Chapter XV., § 4).

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                             PLATE XXXIV

[Illustration:

  PANATHENAIC AMPHORA (BRITISH MUSEUM).
  LATER TYPE (OBV. AND REV.).
]

                  ------------------------------------

The black-figure method is preserved throughout, in spite of the
development in drawing, that of the fourth-century vases being
perfectly free. In the latter there is a lavish use of white and purple
for details, especially on the figure of Athena; and Nike, when present
at the contests, is usually painted white; but the tendency of later
vases to neglect the reverse at the expense of the obverse in the
matter of decoration is strongly manifested. The figure of Athena
becomes greatly elongated, until her head is actually painted on the
neck of the vase, and in all the vases after 336 B.C. she is turned to
the right instead of the left. Two signatures of artists are
found—Sikelos in the fifth century, Kittos in the fourth. There also
exist some miniature fourth-century examples of these vases, the
purpose of which is not obvious; on the reverse of one in the British
Museum is represented a runner in the torch-race.[1243]

                  *       *       *       *       *

A peculiar local development of the black-figure style is to be seen in
the vases found on the site of the temple of the Kabeiri, near Thebes,
in Boeotia. From the style of the painting, which is free and careless,
they can hardly be earlier than the fifth century, and may be later,
the old style being preserved, as in the Panathenaic amphorae, for
religious reasons. The site was excavated in 1887–88, and yielded a
large number of vases and fragments, together with Attic R.F. and plain
black glazed wares. Of the local fabrics the majority are of a
Dionysiac character, or have reference, more or less direct, to the
cult of the Kabeiri; many bear dedicatory inscriptions to the presiding
deities, such as t? ?aß??? or t? pa?d? ?a? t? ?aß???, etc.

The material is a reddish-yellow clay of good quality, on which the
designs are painted in a pigment varying from yellow-brown to the
deep lustrous black of the best Attic vases. Occasionally details in
white or purple are added; incised lines are used only for inner
markings as a rule. The shapes are confined almost entirely to one, a
large deep bowl with two small ring-handles, to which are attached
projections for the support of the fingers; it comes nearest to the
_pella_ described by Athenaeus (see p. 186). The decorative motives
are simple—vine-wreaths, ivy-wreaths, myrtle and olive, and the
wave-pattern; sometimes the reverse is only ornamented with a pattern
of this kind.[1244]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 98. VASE FROM TEMPLE OF KABEIRI: PARODY OF ACHILLES AND CHEIRON
  (BRIT. MUS. B 77).
]

The subjects are interesting from the fact that they are an early
instance (in vase-paintings) of intentional caricatures or grotesques;
this is shown not only in the manner of treating the themes selected,
but in the rude character of the drawing. Among those drawn from myth
and legend may be mentioned Odysseus with Kirke (two instances) and
traversing the sea on a raft; Peleus bringing the young Achilles to
Cheiron (Fig. 98); Kephalos hunting a fox; and Bellerophon slaying the
Chimaera. A favourite subject is that of Pigmies in combat with cranes.
But the most interesting is one which represents the deity Kabeiros
(answering to Dionysos) with his son (Pais, _i.e._ Iacchos) at a
banquet, accompanied by three symbolical figures—Mitos, Pratolaos, and
Krateia. Another fragment shows a train of worshippers approaching the
Kabeiros, in the manner of the Asklepios reliefs.[1245]

The transitional stage from black to red figures is illustrated by more
than one class of vases. Those in which the two methods are united on
one vase have been discussed elsewhere, in considering the
characteristics of the artists who used both. But there is another
class corresponding to neither method, and yet partaking of the
character of both, in which the figures are painted in opaque red or
white pigment laid directly on the surface of the vase, which is
covered throughout with black varnish (Plate XXXV.). Inasmuch as the
method of painting in colours is more suggestive of the B.F. vases,
they are classed therewith in some collections, as in the British and
Athens Museums; but since their appearance and style link them more
closely with the R.F. period, they are found in others, as at Berlin,
ranged with the latter class. In any case they form a distinct group,
in which the earlier examples correspond more with the B.F., the later
with the R.F., vases. They are undoubtedly of Athenian origin, but to
what extent they affected the change from black to red figures is
doubtful.

The practice of laying colours on the black varnish is, of course, one
that was quite familiar to B.F. artists; the analogous procedure in the
R.F. period was the laying of black pigment on the red glaze, as was
necessarily done for details such as devices on shields. The transition
was therefore easy in the case of a vase covered with black varnish, to
painting the figures only in the opaque colours upon it, thereby
enlarging the scope of the process. The incised lines in which the
figure was necessarily sketched out before painting (and which
frequently occur in this class) led the way to the process by which the
R.F. artist engraved his design on the red clay _before_ covering the
rest of the vase with varnish. In the case of female figures it is
obvious that this method was already practised, especially in scenes in
which they appeared entirely nude, and the whole figure was painted
white over the black silhouette, the black becoming the real accessory
where it was required for the hair, etc.[1246]

Dr. Six, who has studied this class, gives a list of about seventy
examples,[1247] including one signed by Nikosthenes (Plate XXXV., fig.
2 = F 114 in the Louvre) which has a figure of a woman painted in white
each side, the style, be it noted, being purely black-figured. In later
specimens the object seems to have been to imitate the appearance of
the R.F. vases, and to paint the figures in a similar but opaque red
colour instead of white.[1248] Other examples again have figures only
incised on the black, without any addition of colour.[1249] In some of
the earlier ones the use of black as an accessory[1250] shows that the
painter, so to speak, “thought” in the B.F. style, but used white for
black and _vice versa_.

Most of the earlier examples have been found in Greece or Magna
Graecia; they are usually of the lekythos form, which is always rare in
Etruria. The later group chiefly consists of small bowls (_phialae_) of
very negligent style, but some are of the typical R.F. forms, such as
the “Nolan” amphora and the stamnos. A considerable number of fragments
were found on the Acropolis of Athens, showing that even these late
imitative specimens, in spite of their rude, careless execution, cannot
be placed later than 480 B.C.

One of the most interesting examples is a fragment found on the
Acropolis of Athens,[1251] with an owl within an olive-wreath; it had
been dedicated to Athena by a potter whose name is now lost. There is
also a good series in the British Museum (B 681–700), including a
lekythos with Odysseus carried under the ram, painted in polychrome.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Before embarking upon the history of the red-figured vases it may be
well to endeavour to see what light the vase-paintings up to this point
throw on the literary traditions preserved for us, chiefly by Pliny, in
regard to early painting. There is, perhaps, no subject which that
writer has treated with greater vagueness; and we are forced to the
conclusion that he really knew nothing about it, and did not comprehend
the meaning of the earlier writers from whom he borrowed.[1252] Still,
it may fairly be supposed that the names he mentions are those of real
persons, even if his account of their achievements is vague or
imaginary. There are also a few stray items of information given by
Aristotle, Aelian, Strabo, and Athenagoras.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                              PLATE XXXV

[Illustration:

  VASES WITH OPAQUE DESIGNS ON BLACK GROUND.
  1. BRIT. MUS.; 2. BY NIKOSTHENES, IN LOUVRE.
]

                  ------------------------------------

Pliny[1253] begins by attributing to Corinth or Sikyon the discovery of
the possibility of producing figures by outlining shadows, as in the
story of Butades (p. 110). The next stage, he says, was to fill in the
outlines with single colours, or monochrome. He next states that
Philokles, an Egyptian,[1254] and Kleanthes of Corinth “invented linear
painting,” and that they were followed by Aridikes of Corinth and
Telephanes of Sikyon, who, still without using any colours, introduced
inner markings and details,[1255] and inscribed names over their
figures. Ekphantos of Corinth introduced the use of a red wash,
employing a pigment made from pounded pottery (_testa trita_),[1256]
which may represent the purple so lavishly employed on Corinthian
vases. A later development was that of monochrome painting—_i.e._ the
use of a single flat body-colour—introduced by Hygiainon, Deinias, and
Charmadas.

Aristotle, on the other hand, speaks of Eucheiros of Corinth as the
“inventor of painting.” The name reminds us of the tradition of
Demaratos, who took with him from Corinth to Etruria a craftsman of
that name. It is also interesting to note that the name is borne by an
Athenian kylix-painter (see above, p. 384), the son of Ergotimos, who
made the François vase. Possibly he may have been the grandson of the
Corinthian artist.

Strabo (viii. 343) and Athenaeus (viii. 346 C) mention a picture by
Kleanthes (see above) which represented the Birth of Athena,[1257] and
can hardly have been later than the seventh century—a period to which
such evidence as we have would allot the series of artists already
named.

It must be borne in mind that the names of these early artists are
those of draughtsmen, not of painters. Even in the time of Polygnotos
drawing was the chief aim of all artists—as the red-figured vases amply
testify—and painting, as we regard the art, only came into existence
after the middle of the fifth century. The development from _liniarem_,
or “outline-drawing,” to monochrome at first sight presents a
difficulty, as it seems to be opposed to the evolution of
vase-painting, which is from silhouette (as in the Dipylon ware) to
outlines (as in the Ionic vases). But even if it is not always
intelligible, we can still observe a distinct continuity in Pliny’s
account.[1258]

After Ekphantos had introduced the filling-in of outlines with red
washes, and Hygiainon and his _confrères_ had continued painting with a
single colour,[1259] a step further was made by Eumaros of Athens, who
distinguished the sexes and “introduced all kinds of new subjects.”
Here we may clearly discern the introduction of white in the later
Corinthian and early Attic wares for female figures, and the growth of
mythological and genre subjects on the vases of the time.[1260] His
innovations of technique and subject may therefore be fairly regarded
as coincident with the great advance in vase-painting made at Athens
under Peisistratos and reacting upon Corinth. It is interesting to note
that the name of Eumaros occurs on a marble base found on the Acropolis
at Athens; and if this can be the painter, his date would be fixed
about 590–570 B.C.[1261]

In any case one thing is certain—that painting had not yet developed
into anything like a high art. It was still purely decorative, and the
few early paintings of which we hear, such as those of Bularchos (p.
361) and Kleanthes, were not beyond the level of the Clazomenae
sarcophagi or the François vase in merit. We probably gain the best
idea of painting which was not merely decorative from the Corinthian
pinakes (p. 316) and the Acropolis warrior-tablet,[1262] especially as
they are painted on the white slip or ?e???µa, which we know to have
been favoured by early Greek painters.[1263]

The relation of Pliny’s next artist, Kimon of Kleonae, and of his
improvements to the work of the vase-painters, has been much discussed
by writers on the red-figured vases; and they have not been by any
means unanimous in their conclusions, either as to the nature of his
“inventions” or as to the time at which their influence made itself
felt. They are described by Pliny in the following words: “Cimon of
Cleonae improved upon the inventions of Eumarus. He invented
_catagrapha_—that is, oblique images—and varied positions of the
features, looking back or up or down. He distinguished limbs from
joints, emphasised the veins, and further reproduced folds and hollows
in the drapery.”[1264]

The _crux_ of this passage is of course the word _catagrapha_, with
Pliny’s Latin equivalent, _obliquas imagines_. At first sight it would
seem that the Latin rendering of the word connected it with the
rendering of the face in a new way, _i.e._ in three-quarter aspect
instead of the old profile of the silhouettes. But this was not
introduced into vase-painting until quite a late period[1265]; it is
found, for instance, on the Meidias vase about 440 B.C., and is
certainly not earlier than the time of Euphronios, whereas Kimon
appears to have lived about 540–490 B.C.[1266] Moreover, there seems to
be some antithesis between the _imagines_ and _voltus_—i.e. _varios
formare voltus_ is not an explanation of the _imagines_—and, on the
whole, it seems more natural to take the first word as a general term
for figures. _Obliquas imagines_, then, would obviously imply some kind
of perspective, which, when applied to the human figure, indicates
foreshortening.

Now, this advance in drawing is first found in the earlier work of
Euphronios, _i.e._ about 500–490 B.C., though traces of it are to be
seen in the later work of the Epictetan cycle. It will be noted in the
next chapter that Epiktetos and his contemporaries are still in the
trammels of the old method. Many of these vases even exhibit traces of
a _decadent_ style, with rough and carelessly drawn figures. As Hartwig
has well pointed out, the real division of _style_ comes, not before
Epiktetos, but between him and Euphronios. The Epictetan cycle is
transitional, and a time of preparation, firstly in the change of
technique, secondly in the evolution of cup-decoration, thirdly in the
discovery of new motives and extending the scope of subjects. The new
birth is seen in the form of increased naturalism, and is parallel to
the development of sculpture under Pythagoras and Myron, who, like
Kimon, “gave prominence to sinews and veins.” We may therefore sum up
with Studniczka and Hartwig by saying that the reforms of Kimon, which
first manifest themselves in Euphronios and his contemporaries about
500 B.C., imply a new theoretical knowledge of linear perspective,
which in practice displays itself in a correct rendering of
foreshortening.[1267] In minor details the same advance is at this time
apparent, in the treatment of the eye, which now begins to be rendered
with some approach to truth, and in the accurate and detailed rendering
of muscles and anatomy, and of folds of drapery. These are precisely
the points in which Pliny regards Kimon as having so greatly advanced
his art, which, as Aelian tells us, he “helped out of
leading-strings.”[1268]

The first painter in polychrome was Panaenos, who also introduced
portraiture, but must still be regarded as a draughtsman only; and,
finally, Polygnotos, by such innovations as giving expression to faces,
and rendering transparent draperies, gave the first real advance to the
art. So far Pliny on the beginnings of Greek painting; but its further
developments, and more particularly the relation of Polygnotos to the
fifth-century vase-paintings, must be more fully dealt with in a
succeeding section.

-----

Footnote 1192:

  _E.g._ B 130 in B.M.

Footnote 1193:

  B.M. B 426.

Footnote 1194:

  _E.g._ B 193–205 in B.M.

Footnote 1195:

  _Excavations in Cyprus_, p. 76, fig. 139.

Footnote 1196:

  As the Birth of Athena, _B.M. Vases_, ii. p. 11, and Fig. 113
  (Chapter XII.).

Footnote 1197:

  Herakles and the Nemean Lion, _ibid._ p. 13; Fig. 125 (Chapter XIV.)
  and Plate XXXII.

Footnote 1198:

  Herakles and the Erymanthian Boar: see Fig. 126 (Chapter XIV.).

Footnote 1199:

  See also on this subject Chapter XII. _init._

Footnote 1200:

  General reference may here be made to Klein’s _Lieblingsinschriften_,
  2nd edn.

Footnote 1201:

  See _id._, _Meistersignaturen_, 2nd edn., for full details.

Footnote 1202:

  See also table at end of Chapter XVII., and Klein, _Meistersig._^2
  p. 32 ff. The principal examples of signed vases are illustrated in
  the _Wiener Vorlegeblätter_, 1888–91.

Footnote 1203:

  A unique exception is the early Attic potter Oikopheles, who uses the
  word ??e??µe?se (Oxford 189 = _Ashmolean Vases_, pl. 26).

Footnote 1204:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1889, pl. 1.

Footnote 1205:

  _Wiener Vorl._ 1889, pl. 5, 1.

Footnote 1206:

  Reinach, ii. 120.

Footnote 1207:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 211 (Plate XXIX.).

Footnote 1208:

  _Wiener Vorl._ 1888, pl. 6, fig. 1.

Footnote 1209:

  Cf. Ar. _Ran._ 1400: ??ß???’ ?????e?? d?? ??ß? ?a? t?tta?a.

Footnote 1210:

  _Wiener Vorl._ 1888, pl. 5, fig. 3.

Footnote 1211:

  Adamek _Unsignierte Vasen des A._, p. 13 ff.) notes the use of
  fringed draperies as especially characteristic of Amasis. By this
  means he is enabled to trace several other vases to his hand.

Footnote 1212:

  _J.H.S._ xix. p. 143.

Footnote 1213:

  Cf. A 1532 from Naukratis in B.M.

Footnote 1214:

  Loeschcke and Karo connect him with Samos, _J.H.S._ xix. p. 143.

Footnote 1215:

  See on Amasis, Klein, _Meisters_. p. 43; Adamek, _Unsignierte Vasen
  d. A._ (_Prager Studien_, Heft v.); Karo, in _J.H.S._ xix. p. 135
  ff.; Loeschcke in Pauly-Wissowa’s _Lexikon_, _s.v._ Other vases
  signed by Amasis are: Reinach, i. 359, 1 and 453, 3; _Boston Mus.
  Report_, 1903, No. 45 (fragment of cup with eyes); Würzburg, iii.
  384; and one mentioned in _Jahrbuch_, 1896, p. 178, note 1. Unsigned
  vases attributed to him by Adamek, Karo, and other writers are B.M. B
  53, B 151, B 197; Louvre F 25, F 26, F 28, F 36; Berlin 1688–92,
  1731; Munich 75 and 81; Adamek, _op. cit._ pls. 1, 2 (Berlin); _Mus.
  Greg._ ii. 3; _J.H.S._ xix. pl. 5 (Würzburg); Reinach, i. 513, 1–5
  (Athens); and two others mentioned _J.H.S._ xix. p. 139, Nos. 11, 12.

Footnote 1216:

  _Wiener Vorl._ 1888, pl. 4, fig. 2. But see also _Bull. de Corr.
  Hell._ 1896, pls. 6–7, p. 372.

Footnote 1217:

  Klein, _Meistersig._ p. 72 ff., reckons seventeen, to which number
  two or three must be added.

Footnote 1218:

  Klein, _op. cit._ p. 81, No. 13.

Footnote 1219:

  For a recently-discovered kylix painted by Sakonides, with Kaulos (?)
  as potter, see _Notizie degli Scavi_, 1903, p. 34.

Footnote 1220:

  See _Arch. Zeit._ 1885, p. 189·

Footnote 1221:

  Most of his vases are illustrated in the _Wiener Vorlegeblätter_ for
  1890–91.

Footnote 1222:

  See Loeschcke in _Arch. Zeit._ 1881, p. 35. He may have imitated
  Etruscan bronze jugs, which were now being imported. The Berlin vase
  (Fig. 136, Chapter XV.) seems to be an imitation of the early
  Cyprio-Phoenician metal bowls (_ibid._).

Footnote 1223:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 364.

Footnote 1224:

  Loeschcke (_Arch. Zeit._ 1881, p. 36) has pointed out that these are
  the most archaic examples of the Attic white-ground vases.

Footnote 1225:

  Fig. 2 on Plate XXXV. is also his work.

Footnote 1226:

  Perhaps the nearest analogy is the “counterchanging” of heraldry.

Footnote 1227:

  _Burlington Fine Arts Club Cat._ 1888, No. 108; 1903, No. 21, p. 102.

Footnote 1228:

  See on the curious technique of this design _Ath. Mitth._ 1879, p.
  290, note 4.

Footnote 1229:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1889, pl. 4.

Footnote 1230:

  Note especially the treatment of the large eyes in either case.

Footnote 1231:

  See on all these vases _Amer. Journ. of Arch._ 1896, p. 1 ff.; also
  Furtwaengler and Reichhold, _Gr. Vasenm._ p. 15 ff., and
  _Jahreshefte_, 1900, p. 69.

Footnote 1232:

  On his technique see _Jahrbuch_, 1899, p. 157, and Furtwaengler and
  Reichhold, _op. cit._ p. 19 ff.

Footnote 1233:

  _Op. cit._ p. 17.

Footnote 1234:

  A third example is given in _Amer. Journ. of Arch._ 1896, pp. 40–41
  (with warriors playing dice).

Footnote 1235:

  The other examples are Munich 373, 375; Louvre F 204; a vase in
  Bologna (_Amer. Journ. of Arch._ 1896, pp. 18, 19); and one in
  Würzburg.

Footnote 1236:

  _J.H.S._ xix. p. 147 ff. See also B.M. B 149–53; Gsell, _Fouilles de
  Vulci_, pls. 7–8, p. 502.

Footnote 1237:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 149, 157.

Footnote 1238:

  See generally C. Smith in _Brit. School Annual_, 1896–97, p. 187 ff.;
  and for a bibliography, Urlichs, _Beiträge_, p. 33.

Footnote 1239:

  _Inscr. Gr._ ii. (_Atticae_) pt. 2, No. 965.

Footnote 1240:

  It is not likely that all of those given as prizes were painted. On
  the other hand, the number of the amphorae may denote the number of
  measures of oil given, the painted vases being, like modern silver
  cups, symbolical and honorific (C. Smith, _loc. cit._).

Footnote 1241:

  See p. 160 for a description.

Footnote 1242:

  A fourth-century fragment at Athens has the name of the agonothetes
  instead of the archon: ?????]?et??(?)t?[? t?? de????. See _Brit.
  School Annual_, 1896–97, pl. 16 (_b_).

Footnote 1243:

  _J.H.S._ xviii. p. 300.

Footnote 1244:

  Riegl, _Stilfragen_, p. 176, notes the absence of all the usual B.F.
  patterns. The ivy-wreaths represent an old Boeotian tradition.

Footnote 1245:

  See _Ath. Mitth._ 1888, pls. 9–12; _J.H.S._ xiii. pl. 4, p. 77 ff.;
  B.M. B 77–8.

Footnote 1246:

  Six (see next note) quotes the Berlin vase, 1843 = _Él. Cér._ iv. 18,
  in illustration of this.

Footnote 1247:

  _Gaz. Arch._ 1888, pp. 193 ff., 281 ff.

Footnote 1248:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 691, 700.

Footnote 1249:

  Cf. _Mus. Ital._ ii. pl. 3 = De Witte, _Coll. à l’Hôtel Lambert_, pl.
  3.

Footnote 1250:

  Cf. B.M. B 693.

Footnote 1251:

  Six, _op. cit._ pl. 29, fig. 9.

Footnote 1252:

  His chief source was Xenokrates of Sikyon, about 280 B.C.: see
  Jex-Blake and Sellers, _Pliny’s Chapters on Greek Art_, p. xxviii;
  Münzer in _Hermes_, xxx. (1895), p. 499 ff.; _id._, _Beitr. zur
  Quellenkritik der Naturgeschichte des Plinius_ (1897).

Footnote 1253:

  _H.N._ xxxv. 15: see _ibid._ 56.

Footnote 1254:

  Probably an inhabitant of Naukratis, and connected with the Ionian
  school of painting. See Smith, _Dict. Antiqs._^3 ii. p. 401;
  Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 582.

Footnote 1255:

  As opposed to mere silhouettes, _e.g._ of the Dipylon vases. Some
  writers take the words (_spargentes lineas intus_) to refer to
  ground-ornaments (see above, p. 312).

Footnote 1256:

  On the possible connection of Ekphantos with Melos, see above, p.
  312. Studniczka’s argument rests partly on the early use of red on
  the Melian vases. In reference to the use of the word ???f?? in the
  Melian inscription, he thinks that the column supported a votive
  painted pinax or vase. For _testa trita_ see Blümner, _Technologie_,
  iv. p. 478 ff.

Footnote 1257:

  The earliest vase-painting with this subject is one from Athens (?f.
  ???.) 1886, pl. 8, fig. 1). See _Jahrbuch_, 1887, p. 153.

Footnote 1258:

  See Jex-Blake and Sellers, _op. cit._ p. xxix.

Footnote 1259:

  These artists represent the Dorian and Continental school, as opposed
  to the polychrome Ionian (see Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 584).

Footnote 1260:

  It has, however, been suggested (Jex-Blake and Sellers, p. 101) that
  _figuras_, the word used by Pliny, denotes “positions” rather than
  “subjects.” But this would seem more appropriate to Kimon (see below).

Footnote 1261:

  As Studniczka maintains (_Jahrbuch_, 1887, p. 152): see also Hartwig,
  _Meistersch._ p. 154.

Footnote 1262:

  ?f. ???. 1887, pl. 6.

Footnote 1263:

  Athenag. _Leg. pro Christo_, 17, 293 (ed. Migne).

Footnote 1264:

  _H.N._ xxxv. 56.

Footnote 1265:

  Even full face is exceptional on the earlier R.F. vases. Cf. B.M. E
  67, 74, and Hartwig, pl. 59, fig. 2.

Footnote 1266:

  He is perhaps mentioned by Simonides of Keos (Overbeck,
  _Schriftquellen_, 379).

Footnote 1267:

  Studniczka says that _catagrapha_ is a scientific term = “projection
  of a figure.” Cf. Stephanus, _Thesaurus_, _s.v._, and Jahn in _Ber.
  d. sächs. Gesellsch._ 1850, p. 138.

Footnote 1268:

  _Lit._ “released from milk and swaddling-clothes” (_Var. Hist._ viii.
  8).




                               CHAPTER X
                           _RED-FIGURED VASES_

    Origin of red-figure style—Date of introduction—?a???-names
      and historical personages—Technical
      characteristics—Draughtsmanship—Shapes—Ornamentation—Subjects
      and types—Subdivisions of style—Severe period and
      artists—Strong period—Euphronios—Duris, Hieron, and
      Brygos—Fine period—Influence of Polygnotos—Later fine
      period—Boeotian local fabric.


At first sight the sudden reversal of technical method involved in the
change from black figures on red ground to red figures on black ground
is not easy to explain. That it was a new invention, not a development
from the old style, is obvious, seeing that no intermediate stage is
possible. The theory has been promulgated by a German writer[1269] that
the idea arose from the effect of the Gorgoneion painted on the inside
of many late B.F. kylikes. Undoubtedly the effect is that of the R.F.
style, the face itself being left red, surrounded by black hair, beyond
which the black is continued over the whole surface of the
interior.[1270] But this theory has not really much to support it; the
Gorgoneion _is in the R.F. technique_, and did not therefore suggest
it; and the earliest R.F. kylikes usually have B.F. interiors, not R.F.
It is exceedingly doubtful that the kylikes had anything to do with
bringing about the change.

Much more probable is the suggestion that the class of vases with
opaque figures on black ground (p. 393) represents the transition, if
transition it can be called.[1271] We have seen that some of these
correspond more to the B.F. vases, others to the R.F., and that in many
cases their _appearance_ is that of R.F. vases. It may easily be
conceived that it occurred to the painter that it was more effective to
let the red clay of the background appear through the black wherever he
would place a figure than to paint the red on to the black. But these
vases are few in number; and as the R.F. vases sprang at once into
great popularity, the new invention must have become too general at the
very first to have been adopted from such a comparatively rare method.
There is also a greater tendency to naturalism in that class than in
the earlier R.F. vases. The fact is that there had been going on
throughout the course of early art a tendency (to which B.F.
vase-painting forms an exception) in favour of drawing figures on a
light ground against a dark background. And even in the B.F. vases this
tendency is not altogether absent, as seen in the attempts at
lightening the figures by making them polychrome, _i.e._ with purple
and white, and also by the practice of covering the rest of the vase
entirely with black.

Now, we have already seen that Andokides was a painter who liked to
combine the two methods on one vase, and also that he was one who
invariably adopted the completely black variety of amphora, for B.F.
painting as well as R.F. His Louvre vase with the women swimming is
clearly one of the earliest R.F. examples in existence. It is therefore
much more likely that he represents for us the author of the new method
than Epiktetos or the other artists who painted “mixed” kylikes or who
used both styles. On the other hand, it must not be forgotten that it
was really in the kylikes that the new style rose into popularity.[1272]

Next to the question of how the new style was brought about comes that
of when it arose, and the length of its duration at Athens. The
chronology of R.F. vases rests on two considerations—the inscriptions
on the vases themselves, and the evidence of history and excavations.
Until within the last twenty years it had been customary to regard the
year 480 B.C. as the line of demarcation between the two methods, and
the earliest date for R.F. vases. Yet as long ago as 1834 Ludwig Ross,
finding a fragment of R.F. pottery among the _debris_ of the Persian
sack of the Acropolis, acutely deduced therefrom that this style must
necessarily have been in existence before the date of the sack, _i.e._
before 480 B.C. His views, however, fell on deaf ears, and it was not
until the scientific exploration of the Acropolis in 1885–89 that his
deduction was seen to be justified. The result of these excavations was
to show that among the mass of pottery found in the pre-Persian stratum
a considerable quantity belonged to a comparatively advanced stage of
R.F. painting, including signatures of artists of the archaic and
severe style down to Euphronios. Some writers have thought that these
fragments may belong to the period between 480 and 460, when the
rebuilding of the site was begun; but so many show traces of burning
that it is far more probable that the earlier date is correct.[1273]
Allowing, then, for the necessary stages of development up to the time
of Euphronios, the beginning of the style may be placed about 525–520
B.C., the date at which, as we have seen, Andokides may be placed.
Besides his name (see above, p. 387) that of Euphronios “the potter”
was also found on a base in the Acropolis excavations.[1274] The other
limit of date will be more conveniently discussed in a subsequent
connection, and it may suffice to say here that the gradual pushing
back of the _terminus post quem_ points now to a much earlier _terminus
ante quem_ than was formerly supposed. Reasons will subsequently appear
for placing the termination of the red-figure fabrics at Athens in the
closing years of the Peloponnesian War (410–400 B.C.).

The evidence afforded by inscriptions is necessarily affected in some
degree by that of excavations, and chiefly important for the _relative_
dates of the vases. It is not palaeographical, but is afforded mainly
by one class of inscriptions, that of the ?a???-names, so far as they
have an historical significance. These names will be the subject of
discussion elsewhere,[1275] and are only alluded to here for their
connection with the question of chronology. It is a well-known feature
of these ?a???-names that many are those of famous historical
personages, such as Alkibiades, Megakles, Miltiades, and
Hipparchos.[1276] But, on the other hand, any attempts to connect the
vases with the historical bearers of the names have met with little
success; there is also the danger of arguing in a circle—_e.g._ of
saying that because Miltiades’ name appears on a vase, it is therefore
to be dated in his youth, and because the vase belongs to the date when
Miltiades was young, therefore it bears the name of that individual.

Where the importance of these names really comes in is in their
relation to particular artists or groups of artists. In this way, as
Klein and Hartwig have shown, connecting-links between the artists can
be traced and their chronological sequence assured. This, taken in
conjunction with questions of style and our fixed dates obtained from
other sources, enables us to extract a fair working chronology from all
the data. The subject must, however, be dealt with in greater detail
when considering the work of individual artists, and only a few general
statements can be laid down here.

Many of the historical ?a???-names, such as Hipparchos or Glaukon, were
probably very common at Athens,[1277] and we have therefore no grounds
for attaching importance to their appearance. But in regard to the
great painter Euphronios, whose date is fairly certain, it is important
to note that two different names are connected with vases in his
earlier and later manner respectively, viz. Leagros[1278] and Glaukon.
Euphronios began his career about 500–490 B.C., and it probably covered
some forty years, from about 495 to 455. Hence we may place the time of
Leagros’ youth about 495–490, that of Glaukon about 465–460, and it is
remarkable that the latter appears as “son of Leagros” in one or two
cases.[1279] Now, we know that there was an Athenian general Leagros
who was st?at???? in 467, and fell in battle against the Edones in that
year. Also that he had a son, Glaukon, who commanded at Kerkyra in
433–432. In this case the historical data fit in so exactly with the
evidence of the vases and of the Acropolis excavations[1280] that we
need hardly hesitate to accept the identity of these two names.

It has been assumed—and the assumption has hardly been questioned—that
the ?a???-names are necessarily always those of youths, _i.e._ of about
seventeen to twenty years of age; this view is supported both by the
general character of the subjects on the vases where they appear, and
by the frequent use of the analogous formula ? pa?? ?a???. Dr. Hartwig
has laid down certain conclusions in regard to these names which have
met with general acceptance, and may be briefly restated here by way of
summarising the subject.

(1) All vases with the same ?a???-name are limited to a period of ten
years, and consequently all those which are by one artist belong to a
definite circumscribed period of his life.

(2) All vases by different artists, but with the same ?a???-name, are
approximately contemporaneous, _i.e._ within ten years.

(3) The appearance of two or more ?a???-names on the same vase
indicates the approximate similarity of age of the persons named, the
greatest possible difference being ten years.

(4) All vases with the same ?a???-name, whether by one artist or more,
can always be linked together by their style; the same name does not
appear on a man’s earliest and latest vases.

He further impresses the caution that the identity and position of the
pa?de? ?a??? (_i.e._ whether or no they belonged to the aristocratic
class) is a secondary question compared with that of the development of
painting which they help to elucidate.

The question of fabric is one that hardly needs discussion, the
evidence pointing so unanimously to Athens in all cases. The apparent
exceptions suggested by classes of vases found almost exclusively on
one site, like the “Nolan” amphorae or the Gela lekythi, can easily be
shown to be no real exceptions. We have already met more than once with
instances of particular fabrics being favoured by particular places;
and just as Ionian vases were imported to Caere or Vulci, and a special
class of Attic B.F. vases made for Cyprus, so we may suppose that
certain Athenian makers had a monopoly of export to Nola, to Gela, or
elsewhere. Otherwise similarity of style, of technique, of subject, of
the alphabet of inscriptions, and all other details point to a purely
homogeneous fabric, and that this was located in Athens itself is not a
matter to be seriously disputed. To this complete monopoly which Athens
enjoyed in the fifth century only one exception can be traced, that of
Boeotia, where local fabrics continued to be made at Thebes and
Tanagra. Of these one class has already been discussed (p. 391); the
other will be treated of subsequently (p. 451).

We must next consider briefly the technical characteristics and the
forms of the Attic R.F. vases. As regards the former, the method
pursued during the period under consideration may be summarised as
follows. The artist sketches his design on the red clay with a
fine-pointed tool; he then surrounds this outline with black varnish,
laid on with a pen or brush,[1281] to the extent of about an eighth of
an inch all round, this being done to prevent the varnish, when laid on
over the rest of the ground, from running over into any part of the
design. Finally, details such as features or folds of drapery are added
with a brush in black lines on the red, this process representing the
incised lines of the old style; and further details are often expressed
either in a thinned black pigment which becomes brown and is sometimes
only perceptible in a strong light, or by application of white and
purple as in the last period. In the severe style purple is generally
used; but at a later stage this colour was dropped, and finally
replaced by white. The accessory colours were chiefly used for fillets
in the hair, liquids, flowers, and other small details, as well as for
inscriptions. Thus we see that the technical process of the preceding
method is exactly reversed and that the figures now stand out in the
natural colour of the clay against the black ground.

The advantages of the new method were obvious. As long as the
vase-painters continued content with stiff and hieratic forms and mere
silhouettes the black figures were sufficient. The careful mapping-out
of the hair and muscles, the decorations, and all the details of shadow
in painting and of unequal surface in sculpture could be easily
expressed by the new method. But it is evident that these stiff lines
were quite inadequate to express those softer contours, which melted,
as it were, into one another, and marked the more refined grace and
freedom of the rapidly advancing schools of sculpture and painting. By
the change of colour of the figures to the lucid red or orange of the
background, the artist was enabled to draw lines of a tone or tint
scarcely darker than the clay itself, but still sufficient to express
all the finer anatomical details; while the more important outlines
still continued to be marked with fine black lines. At first the style
is essentially the same, the forms precise, the eyes in profile, the
attitudes rigid, and the draperies rectilinear. The backgrounds may
have been painted in by an ordinary workman, and some specimens exist
in which it has never been laid on (cf. p. 222). The artists seem to
have worked from slight sketches, and according to their individual
feelings and ideas, and as duplicate designs are quite unknown, there
was clearly no system of copying.

The correspondence of _style_ in the figures on the earlier R.F. vases
to those of B.F. technique shows that the two methods must have
coexisted for a time, and this is further borne out by the mixed vases
of Andokides, Hischylos, and others, and by the work of artists who
employed either style, like Pamphaios. The latter, for instance, seems
to have adhered to the old style by preference for hydriae and large
vases, but preferred to follow the new fashion in the kylix.

To quote a recent writer: “The new method opened up a path for the
freer exercise of the imagination,” and we can see in the red-figure
vases a gradual development of artistic conception and power of
expression, together with the shaking off of all restrictions until the
perfection of drawing is reached, and “the red figures stand out
against the black, unencumbered with anything that might distract from
harmony of colouring or purity of outline.”[1282] It is the essential
characteristic of the new style that it is drawing rather than
painting, and it stands out as the final attainment of what the
vase-painters had really been striving after from the days of the
Melian and early Ionic wares—namely, the perfection of linear design.
The same principle is at work in the vases with white ground which
passed through parallel phases of development.

Among minor details of drawing in which an advance is conspicuous is
the treatment of hair, eyes, and drapery. In the B.F. style the hair
was indicated as a black mass, standing out against the light
background; but now that the background had become black, a separation
was necessary. At first this was done by adhering to the old engraved
line method, for which came to be substituted a narrow unpainted line.
Next, an advance was made in the treatment of the hair itself, with a
view to more accuracy in detail, and the contours are undulated or
separate locks shown on the forehead. Sometimes a kind of stippling
process is adopted, by means of which the hair is indicated by rows or
clusters of raised dots, representing close curls, such as are seen in
Attic sculpture of the late archaic period.

The general contours of the forms are slender; the foreheads are low,
the noses prominent, the eyes long, the chins sharp, the legs short and
thick, and the folds of the garments stiff and rectilinear. Women are
not distinguished in this style either by their colour or by the shape
of their eyes, in which respects they are drawn just like the men, but
exclusively by their costume and form. The white hair of old men is
indicated by white markings on the black ground, and curly hair, as
noted, by little raised knobs of black paint (ß?st?????). The figures
are generally small, but some of grandiose proportions occur even in
the earlier stages, though more characteristic of the succeeding
“strong” style. The principal outlines are usually finished with
wonderful spirit and truth, but sometimes, as in the extremities, great
carelessness is visible. The general effect is much enhanced by the
fineness of the clay, which in the earlier R.F. vases is of a bright
orange-red, as also by the brilliancy of the black varnish.

[Illustration:

  From _B.M. Cat._ iii.
  FIG. 99. DIAGRAM SHOWING DEVELOPMENT IN RENDERING OF EYE.
]

The development of the form of the eye is most important, as an aid to
chronology (see Fig. 99). In the B.F. period it was invariably treated
in two ways,—that of a man as a complete circle, in front view, between
the lids, of which the upper is more arched than the lower; that of a
woman is almond-shaped. In the R.F. vases the eye in front view is
still maintained with figures in profile, but the sexes are not
distinguished; the pupil is painted black, and the lids drawn at first
like the B.F. male eye, then almond-shaped. The next stage is to shift
the pupil (which now becomes a ring with central dot) into the inner
corner. Lastly, this corner is opened out till it assumes the correct
profile appearance, and then, about the middle of the fifth century,
the pupil also attains the correct form. About midway in this
development, as we have already seen, the power is acquired of moving
the position of the pupil to express looking upwards, downwards, or
sideways; the importance of this point as bearing on the new
developments of Kimon of Kleonae we have already discussed. The
eyelashes are not rendered until the correct profile is attained,
except in a few instances, such as the Berlin cup of Euphronios (2282),
where the lids are fringed with short, vertical strokes.[1283]

In regard to the treatment of drapery, the earlier vases, such as those
of the Epiktetos cycle, retain the B.F. method of rendering folds only
in the skirts of the chiton, these taking the form of parallel lines.
Gradually the folds follow the motion of the body; and finally, under
Euphronios, comes a marked advance, whereby contrasts of material are
indicated.[1284] He uses fine brown crinkly lines to represent the soft
transparent Athenian fabric which we also see worn by the archaic
female figures of the Acropolis.

Among the many improvements in drawing effected during the R.F. period,
a notable one is that of the introduction of true perspective and more
than conventional landscape. We know from the shield of the Athena
Parthenos that this began to be understood at Athens by the middle of
the fifth century, as also from the paintings of Polygnotos, and hence
we are not surprised to find it appearing in the vases of the period
when that artist’s influence began to be felt. A fine example is the
krater from Orvieto in the Louvre, with an Argonautic scene (see p.
442); and even more beautiful is the Blacas krater in the British
Museum, which shows Selene disappearing over the top of a hill, and the
stars setting in the sea (see Plate LIII.). These two vases also
illustrate the introduction of the new principle of placing figures at
different levels which was elaborated in the Meidias hydria, the vases
of Kertch, and to a still greater degree in those of Southern Italy.
All these details indicate the growing tendency towards a pictorial
style, which in the first instance was due to Polygnotos.

The =shapes= of the R.F. period are to a great extent the same as in
the last, but most of them are modified to some degree, and some new
ones are introduced. Moreover, the relative popularity of certain
shapes varies, the amphora and hydria of the B.F. period being now
surpassed in favour by the kylix, the krater and lekythos receiving
more attention, and certain new forms, such as the askos and stamnos,
appearing at different stages.

For the first half of the period, from 520 to 460 B.C., the kylix is
pre-eminent, not only in point of numbers, but for the attention
devoted to its decoration. It is, as we have seen, doubtful whether it
was actually in the kylikes that the new style came into being, but in
any case they form the material for the study of its earlier phases.
The form is that of the later B.F. varieties (see p. 191), as used by
Exekias and the painters who used the large eyes in its decoration,
tracing its origin probably to an Ionic source.[1285] At first the
decoration is often confined to the interior, or the exterior designs
are little more than conventional, consisting of the eyes and a simple
motive or figure between.[1286] In the strong period there is usually a
connection between the interior and exterior designs, the whole often
forming successive episodes of a story[1287]; but subsequently the old
principle asserts itself, and the interior subject becomes the
important one. Slight variations of form occur,[1288] as in the cups of
Brygos, with their off-set lip, or the delicate products of Sotades,
the handles of which are shaped like a chicken’s merrythought. In the
latest specimens the stem is often replaced by a flat broad foot, or
the bowl becomes flat and ugly, losing all the beauty of the earlier
graceful curves.

Among other drinking-cups the kotyle, kantharos, and rhyton are most
often found. The former was favoured by Epiktetos and Hieron, and a
kantharos is signed by Epigenes, others by Nikosthenes and Duris. The
kantharos, though a very beautiful form, is never common in the painted
vases, being perhaps oftener made in metal. Among the kotylae we may
mention here a series painted with an owl and olive-wreath,[1289] which
obviously have some reference to the cult of Athena. They have been
identified, but on slight authority, with the ?a?a???a??? mentioned by
Athenaeus[1290]; but their real meaning has not yet found a
satisfactory explanation. The _rhyton_ strictly belongs to the series
of plastic vases (see pp. 201, 211), the lower portion being always
modelled in the form of a head, human or animal, or two conjoined. Some
of these are signed by artists, such as Charinos and Kaliades.[1291]

Of the amphora three main varieties are found. The earlier type, which
reproduces the “black-bodied” or panel-amphora of the B.F. period, did
not long remain in favour, and was mainly used by Andokides and
Euthymides and their associates. The panel system of decoration is
still retained, the framework being formed of ornamental patterns as in
the old style. Secondly, there is the “Nolan” amphora, which came in
about 500–480 B.C., and was obviously an improvement on the old
“red-bodied” B.F. type. It is a very graceful, slender form, with long
neck, distinguished by the surpassing excellence of its black varnish,
and the impression of taste and restraint given by its simple
decoration of one or two figures each side (see Plate XXXVI.). The
third variety is the so-called _pelike_ (see p. 163), a not very
successful variation of the amphora, but for some reason very popular
in the later stages. With its flat foot and bulbous body it stands in
the same relation to the amphora as does the so-called aryballos (see
below) to the lekythos.

Two forms that may be connected with the amphora are the stamnos and
the psykter (see pp. 163, 172). The former is peculiar to the R.F.
period in its earlier stages; the first known example is signed by
Pamphaios, a “transitional” artist. Most of the known specimens attain
a high average of excellence. The psykter or wine-cooler is very rare,
but there are two fine examples signed by Euphronios and Duris.

The hydria in this period at first retains the B.F. form, as seen in an
example of about 500 B.C. signed by Phintias (B.M. E 159), but the
tendency to prefer a curvilinear outline is soon manifested. The new
development is conventionally known as a _kalpis_. The shoulder having
ceased to be distinct from the body, the design becomes single, or else
is confined to the upper part of the field.

Of the krater we have at least four varieties, all belonging to the
more developed stages of the period. The earliest example is the
Antaios-krater of Euphronios in the Louvre, about 500 B.C., which is of
the form known as _vaso a calice_ (p. 170); but this and the other
varieties never become really common till the final stages are reached.
The bell-krater, or _vaso a campana_, is only found in the late fine
period, and is then almost the only kind of large vase made; the
volute-handled krater, which was developed from the old column-handled
type, is seen in some fine specimens. At first the design (as in the
B.F. example by Nikosthenes, B.M. B 364) is confined to the neck. The
treatment of the column-handled type is interesting as a survival of
archaism both in design and arrangement, with the bordered panels and
occasional B.F. friezes of animals.[1292]

Among the smaller vases, the oinochoë and lekythos with their
varieties, the askos and the pyxis, are the most important. With the
exception of the ordinary form of lekythos these belong chiefly to the
later stages, when the preference was for a sort of miniature style.
Very few of these bear artists' signatures. The oinochoë differs little
from the B.F. examples; the pyxis is practically a revival of an old
form favoured in the Corinthian and other early fabrics. The latter are
usually decorated with domestic or marriage subjects, in reference to
their use by women for toilet purposes (see Plates XLII., XLIII.).

The lekythos was, as we shall see, the form exclusively employed for
the funeral vases, and largely also for others with polychrome
decoration on white ground. Those painted with red figures belong
mainly to the strong period (500–460), and have been mostly found in
Sicily, whither they were imported by preference, like the amphorae
made for Nola; a fine specimen is given on Plate XXXVI. When this form
came to be adopted for the funeral vases, a new type arose with bulbous
or spherical body, conventionally known as an _aryballos_. In the late
fine style we have many examples of this form, with rich polychrome
decoration and gilding (Plate XLII.).[1293]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                             PLATE XXXVI

[Illustration: RED-FIGURED “NOLAN” AMPHORAE AND LEKYTHOS (BRITISH
MUSEUM).]

                  ------------------------------------

The =ornamental patterns= on R.F. vases do not, generally speaking,
call for so much attention as those of earlier style; they are on the
whole used with great restraint and little variety, and are more
subordinate to the designs than at any other period of vase-painting.
The principal motives are the palmette, maeander, and egg-pattern; all
others are comparatively rare. It is interesting to note, on the early
amphorae and hydriae, and on the column-handled kraters down to quite a
late date, the survival of the old panel system with its borders of
ornament. Strictly speaking, now that the background was black
throughout, there was no necessity for enclosing the space on which the
figures were depicted; but the conservative instincts prevailed,
especially while the old shapes were retained.[1294] Gradually,
however, as these vases assumed new forms, the borders were almost
unconsciously dropped—first the sides, then the top, and lastly the
lower border, which maintained its ground longer than the others. The
same tendency, from a formal framework to absolute freedom, is in fact
to be observed in all the vases; and in the later stages we note a new
development, that of an elaborate pattern of palmettes under the
handles, which assumes more and more prominence.

The evolution of the palmette on R.F. vases has been skilfully traced
by Dr. Winter[1295] in reference to the kylikes; but it is no less
interesting in the amphorae and similar forms. In both cases it arose
from the tendency to make the handles terminate in stylised palmettes,
which on the B.F. kylikes of the minor artists are often a prominent
element in the decoration. Similarly, on the B.F. red-bodied amphorae
we have the symmetrical compositions of palmettes under the handles
radiating from a common centre. These were at first reduced to a modest
single palmette or a pair, but soon spread out again, preserving at
first the symmetrical grouping; subsequently, with an increasing
tendency to naturalism, the palmettes, enclosed within graceful
tendrils, form _unsymmetrical_ but highly pleasing compositions without
any definite centre.[1296] This development of ornament under the
handles—to which part of the vase it was almost restricted—can be
traced during the first half of the fifth century, till it reaches its
height about the middle. Where a band of ornament was required round
the base of the design, as on the large calyx-kraters, it takes the
form of a row of palmettes enclosed in tendrils, in the style of modern
arabesques; or the palmettes are arranged in pairs, set obliquely, and
each pair divided by a scroll ending in volutes. Or, again, a row of
somewhat squat palmettes, similarly enclosed, alternates with
lotos-flowers in the old style, as on B.M. E 169.[1297]

[Illustration: FIG. 100. PALMETTES UNDER HANDLES (EARLY R.F. PERIOD).]

In the kylikes the development of the handle-ornament first begins with
Epiktetos, who (as on E 3 in B.M.) first draws a free palmette with
separated leaves on either side.[1298] As the tendency to cover the
whole of the exterior space with the design increased, the intervening
space under the handle came to be filled in also, by extending the
tendrils of the palmettes and terminating them with buds (Fig.
100).[1299] Next, a tendency to symmetrical composition each side is
seen, the palmettes being doubled in number[1300]; or, again, an
attempt is made at uniting the two isolated palmette-systems in one
harmonious whole, and at the same time to fill the intervening space,
by means of interlacing tendrils.[1301] The palmettes are further
increased to three or four each side, and in the arrangement is seen
the tendency to freedom even at the cost of symmetry already noted, as
in Fig. 101.[1302] Thus is reached the point at which the severe passes
into the strong style. In the latter the palmettes are often omitted
altogether,[1303] especially where the two exterior scenes are
connected; or their place is taken by some figure under the handle, as
on vases by Hieron or Brygos. Where the patterns do occur, they are
often stereotyped, as in the vases of Duris, who on nine examples with
handle-patterns repeats the same device in each case. In the fine
style, after 460 B.C., the symmetrical arrangement recurs, the usual
type consisting of a double palmette between two large ones, with
connecting and enclosing tendrils.

[Illustration: FIG. 101. PALMETTES UNDER HANDLES (LATER STAGE).]

Another method of tracing the chronological sequence of the R.F. cups
is by means of the maeander patterns which surround the interior design
and extend below the outside scenes (Fig. 102).[1304] A parallel
development of this pattern may also be traced on the amphorae and
other vases, where it is used as a border below the figures. In the
severe style, as in the cups of Epiktetos, this pattern has not yet
made its appearance, and its place is taken by a simple line of red;
and in the vases of Euphronios, on which it is first found, a simple
maeander is employed. The first to vary this was Duris, who alternates
it with squares, the centre of which is “voided” in the form of a red
cross, and this practice subsequently became invariable. The square
itself shows a development of form, the cross being first filled in
with a black centre, then made diagonal; next, the black background is
largely diminished, until it disappears, except for dots between the
arms of the black cross; finally, it changes into the form of a
chequered square, black and red, of which the red squares are sometimes
dotted.

The =subjects= on red-figured vases may not perhaps be so varied or so
full of mythological interest as those on the black-figured, but yet
present many features worthy of attention. At the very outset we see
the tendency towards scenes from real life in preference to those from
mythology; and on the whole throughout the period the ratio of one
class to the other is exactly the reverse of the preceding period. Nor
are the stock subjects in either class the same. In regard to mythology
the cosmogonic themes of B.F. vases, such as the Gigantomachia and the
Birth of Athena, are replaced by such subjects as Eleusinian and Attic
local cults, the sending forth of Triptolemos or the birth of
Erichthonios. In the heroic cycles Herakles is no longer the popular
favourite, but is supplanted, for reasons presently to be detailed, by
Theseus. The Argonautika frequently provides subjects for vases of the
more developed style, in which the influence of Polygnotos is felt; and
the _Odyssey_ begins to rival the _Iliad_ as a source of epic themes.
The influence of the stage is as yet hardly felt, though here and there
scenes may be traced to the influence of some Satyric drama.

[Illustration:

  From _B.M. Cat._ iii.
  FIG. 102. DEVELOPMENT OF MAEANDER-AND-CROSS PATTERN.
]

In subjects relating to Dionysos and his attendant Satyrs and Maenads a
considerable change is to be noted, in the direction of a preference
for violent action. The Bacchic revellers of the B.F. vases, even at
their highest pitch of excitement, are generally stiff wooden figures,
with mechanical and restrained pose or action. But the exteriors of
many cups of the best R.F. period, such as those of Hieron or Brygos,
are enlivened by throngs of frenzied Maenads and wild drunken Satyrs,
given up to the most unrestrained and licentious merriment (see Chapter
XIII.).

Turning to the subjects of daily life again, it may be observed that on
the B.F. vases the preference is for battle-scenes, warriors setting
out for battle, or scenes of the chase; even athletic subjects are in a
great minority, except on the Panathenaic amphorae. In the R.F. period
the preference is for athletic scenes, banquets, and the life of women
and children; we also find frequent illustrations of religious cults,
and scenes of sacrifice and libations. The R.F. vases of the severe
stage in the main follow on the lines of the later B.F. period, except
in the interiors of the kylikes of the Epictetan cycle. In these we
find very few instances of mythological subjects, unless it be single
figures of Satyrs. The main object of the painter was to fill in the
circular space as best he might, and this space only admitted of a
single figure, the rule being observed that exterior and interior
figures should be of similar proportions. Hence the easiest solution
was obviously to choose a simple figure, such as that of a nude young
man, and depict him in various simple attitudes, running, leaping,
carrying a vase or musical instrument, or otherwise engaged in such a
way as to fill the space with his limbs or the objects he carried (see
p. 426).

In the “strong” style we observe a new principle at work, which may
be described in a single phrase as “the glorification of the Attic
ephebos or young athlete.” A new impetus had been given to athletics
at Athens by the Peisistratidae, who encouraged a more extensive
celebration of festivals, and thus we find a growing fondness for the
introduction of scenes from the palaestra and stadium, often rendered
with considerable spirit and unconventionality, as in a group of
boxers quarrelling,[1305] or on another vase depicting the humorous
side of the armed foot-race.[1306]

The introduction of scenes from the story of Theseus, which now begin
to be frequent, especially on the kylikes, is no doubt due partly to
this cause, though partly also to religious and patriotic reasons.
Theseus seems to have been regarded as the typical Attic ephebos and
athlete, and his contests as analogous to success in the palaestra.
Hence the grouping of scenes from his labours after the manner of
groups of athletes variously engaged. It was formerly thought that the
popularity of the Theseus legends was due to the bringing back of his
bones from Skyros by Kimon, and their solemn burial in the Theseion,
which gave rise to a regular cult of the national hero. But this took
place in 469 B.C., and recent investigations have shown that many of
the Theseus vases must be placed at an earlier date. He was, however,
supposed to have appeared at the battle of Marathon in aid of the
Athenians, and this event may have been quite sufficient to bring his
cult into prominence.

Towards the middle of the fifth century several new types are
introduced—such as the youth as distinguished from the ephebos, the
girl as distinguished from the matured woman,[1307] and the infant
playing with toys. Juvenile games, such as the top, hoop, and
knucklebones, now become generally popular. The evolution of the types
of Eros and Nike virtually dates from this time[1308]; hitherto Eros
(as, for instance, on the kylikes) has seldom appeared, and Nike is
also hardly found before the “strong” style. Meaningless groups of
figures, conversing or without particular action, are common on the
exterior of cups by Hieron and his contemporaries; and similar groups,
though, in accordance with the spirit of the times, more freely and
pictorially composed, become the recognised method of decorating the
small elegant vases of the late fine style. In some of these an ancient
practice is revived of attempting to give interest to the scenes by
adding mythological names to the figures. But these are chosen quite at
haphazard, sometimes as vague personifications (see Chapter XII., under
Aphrodite), sometimes in such anomalous collocations as Thetis and
Hippolyte, or Danae, Helen, and Iphigeneia.[1309]

In the treatment of mythological scenes it is curious to note how,
almost from the first, the well-worn conventional types of the B.F.
style are discarded, the painter, with his new-born capacities for
drawing and free composition, instinctively forming his own idea of his
subject, and departing from the lines on which his predecessors had
worked. Some subjects are almost entirely ignored, such as the chariot
procession (of Herakles or deities), the contests of Herakles with
Triton and the Cretan bull, warriors playing draughts, and Odysseus and
Polyphemos. The labours of Herakles are largely replaced by those of
Theseus. In other cases the subjects are still popular, but the “type”
is no longer preserved, as in the case of the Judgment of Paris or some
of the labours of Herakles.

But it must not be supposed that the principle of recognised “types” is
altogether absent from the R.F. vases. There are, in fact, certain
motives which occur over and over again, only with this difference—that
they are not always employed with the same signification. Thus the
“pursuing” type, which is as common as any on R.F. vases, may be either
mythological or ordinary. In the former case Eos pursues Kephalos, or
Menelaos Helen; in the latter a Seilenos pursues a Maenad, or a warrior
or hunter a woman. This type becomes almost conventional, and the
figures can only be identified when inscribed. Theseus, Ajax, Orestes,
Ion, Alkmaion, and Neoptolemos all pursue women in the same manner.
Again, the B.F. type of Peleus seizing Thetis, sometimes found on R.F.
vases,[1310] is used for that of a Seilenos seizing a Maenad, even the
snakes into which Thetis transforms herself becoming the ordinary
attribute of the Bacchanal.

A different class of subjects, in which the subject remains the same
but the type varies, is also found on R.F. vases. In such cases the
various artists seem to have drawn their inspiration from the same
model; it might be a famous sixth-century painting or sculptured group,
but each has treated it according to his own individuality. A good
instance is the subject of the sack of Troy, the principal episodes of
which we find depicted by the masters Euphronios and Brygos (Plate
LIV.), and on a hydria of somewhat later date.[1311]

Another characteristic of R.F. vases is the individualising of
barbarian types, a new feature in Greek art. It is possible that this
is largely the effect of the Persian wars, which rendered the Greeks
familiar with barbarian costumes.[1312] In any case the fashion of
wearing Thracian cloaks and other outlandish garments seems to have
been adopted by the young men of Athens at the beginning of the fifth
century, and many of the cups of that period represent young horsemen
apparelled in this fashion (see Chapter XV.). There was also in the
fifth century a fondness for vases modelled in the form of heads of
negroes or Persians. Such subjects as those relating to Orpheus, the
rape of Oreithyia, Herakles and Busiris, or combats of Greeks with
Amazons or Persians, also illustrate the popularity of these new ideas.

The only other class of subjects to which reference need be made is
that dealing with religious cults,[1313] such as libations or
sacrifices to deities or terminal figures, particular ceremonies and
festivals, or quasi-religious competitions of an athletic or musical
kind.[1314]

In regard to style, the Attic red-figured vases fall into four
principal groups, which are usually classified as follows (though each
group is sometimes subdivided):—

(1) =The archaic or severe period= (about 520–500 B.C.), in which there
is little advance in the drawing, which is stiff and lacks technical
freedom. Apart from the new experiments in technique, it is marked by
its wide and novel choice of subjects, with great attention paid to
details. The principal artists whose signatures are found in this group
are: (_a_) cup-painters—Epiktetos, Hischylos, Pheidippos, Pamphaios,
Chelis, Chachrylion, Euergides, Epilykos, Hermaios, Sikanos; (_b_)
other painters—Andokides, Euthymides, Phintias (amphora and hydria),
Hypsis (hydria), Psiax and Hilinos.

(2) =The strong style= (about 500–460 B.C.), characterised by a great
and sudden advance in drawing and power of expression, which leads the
painter to attempt difficult subjects with success. The difficulties of
front-view or three-quarter drawing, as opposed to the old
profile-figures, are also largely overcome. In the amphorae and other
forms the compositions are restrained and dignified, being often
limited to one or two figures in large style. The principal artists
are: (_a_) cup-painters—Euphronios, Oltos, Sosias, Phintias, Peithinos,
Duris, Hieron, Brygos, Amasis, Onesimos; (_b_) other artists—Euxitheos,
Smikros.

(3) =The fine style= (about 460–440 B.C.) exhibits the culmination of
technique and composition, with great breadth and largeness of
conception in the larger vases, delicacy and refinement in the smaller.
Cup-painting has passed its zenith, and yields comparatively few
artists’ names. In this period the influence of Polygnotos and the
great painters begins to make itself felt, in a tendency to more
pictorial composition; landscape is indicated, and figures are placed
at different levels. The influence of sculpture may also be traced. The
chief artists' names are: Aeson, Aristophanes and Erginos, Epigenes,
Hegias, Hermonax, Megakles, Polygnotos, Sotades, and Xenotimos; Meidias
and Nikias; Xenophantos.

(4) =The late fine style= (about 440–400 B.C.) is marked by a great
falling-off in every respect. The extraordinarily rapid advance, both
in artistic conception and in power of execution, during the preceding
fifty years, fostered by the concurrent advance in sculpture and
painting, hastened the vase-painter to his ruin. With the attainment of
perfection in drawing, dexterity and grace are his sole aim, and in
place of vigour and originality we meet with over-refinement and
mannerisms, and florid pictorial compositions executed in a careless
manner.

We now propose to speak in detail of the principal artists of this
period, a study of whose works will be sufficient to give a clear idea
of the achievements of the new style, at all events down to the middle
of the century.[1315] After that time the signatures become so rare
that the later vases are best treated as a whole.

It is important to note, by way of preliminary, the various methods of
signature which the artists adopt (see also Chapter XVII.).[1316] The
ordinary signatures fall under four headings: (1) ?p???se?; (2)
???a?e?; (3) _A_. ?p???se?, _B_. ???a?e? (4) _A_. ?p???se ?a? ???a?e?.
In the archaic period ?p???se? covers the work of the potter and
painter, except in the case where the latter is specially mentioned. In
the best period we usually find ?p???se? on the kylikes, ???a?e? on the
amphorae. Euphronios and Phintias use either (1) or (2). The vase E 12
in the British Museum has only the inscription, ??µfa??? ?p???se?; but,
as will be seen later, there is good reason for supposing that the
exterior was not painted by him. Different formulae, it has been
suggested, may represent different periods in a man’s career, as in the
case of Euphronios, who was at first a painter in Chachrylion’s
workshop, then worked independently, and finally adopted Onesimos as a
partner (see p. 434). The use of the imperfect ?p??e? in some cases is
characteristic of the transitional period (see below, p. 430).

In the archaic or severe period the typical name is that of
=Epiktetos=, who, as we have seen, is thought by some authorities to
have been actually the inventor of the red-figure style. However this
may be, he is the principal representative of the development of
cup-painting during this period—a development which has been carefully
traced by Klein.[1317] We have no B.F. kylikes signed by him, although
there are four examples of “mixed” cups with B.F. interiors, three of
which were made by Hischylos, the fourth by Nikosthenes, while
Epiktetos was presumably responsible for the whole of the decoration.
He invariably signs with the formula ???a?e?, from which we know that
all his signed vases are actually the work of his brush. Besides those
already mentioned, he painted two cups which bear Pamphaios’ name as
potter, and two more with those of Hischylos and Python as potters—all
R.F. throughout, one of the Pamphaios cups retaining the old fashion of
decoration with eyes on the exterior. The vase made by Python[1318] is
interesting from its subject—the slaying of Busiris by Herakles.[1319]
It belongs to an advanced stage of his career, when the exterior
designs were assuming more importance and developing from decorative
compositions to regular friezes. Thirteen kylikes and ten plates with
designs like those on the interiors of the cups (Plate XXXVII.), a
kotyle with Pistoxenos’ name as potter, and two amphorae, make up the
total of Epiktetos’ performances.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                            PLATE XXXVII

[Illustration: INTERIOR OF KYLIX OF TRANSITIONAL STYLE; 2, PLATE BY
EPIKTETOS (BRITISH MUSEUM).]

                  ------------------------------------

Murray thus describes the chief characteristics of Epiktetos'
work[1320]: “No painter is so uniform and at the same time so peculiar
in his manner as Epiktetos. His drawing is always characterised by
precision and fastidiousness. He loves slim, youthful forms.... He
prefers to draw his figures on a small scale, where his minute touches
produce at times a startling vividness. He appears to have been
influenced in a measure by the older miniature vase-painters [the
‘minor artists’] ... his manner is singularly precise and fastidious
... but his precision never fails him.... He uses skilfully faint
yellow lines for the inner markings of muscle and bone.” Hartwig points
out that he continues the development of a refined archaism from Amasis
(p. 382). The period of his activity may be placed between 530 and 500
B.C.

=Pamphaios=, although the majority of his vases are in the R.F.
technique, really excelled in the old method. We have from his hand two
B.F. hydriae, four B.F. kylikes, two mixed kylikes, fifteen R.F.
kylikes (five with interior designs only), two amphorae and a stamnos,
and he also made two cups for Epiktetos. He signs consistently
?p???se?. In the B.F. hydria in the British Museum (B 300 = Fig. 120),
he, as Murray says, has indulged to excess his sense of refinement and
grace, in which he was unsurpassed. When he turned to red figures, the
new technique seems to have perplexed him, and he found himself unable
to use his faculty for minute detail. But though comparatively coarse
and decadent, there is a freshness and vigour in his new conceptions,
especially in the Museum stamnos (E 437) with Herakles and Acheloos,
which atones for other deficiencies.

Most remarkable of all his signed works is the British Museum kylix (E
12), with its exquisite exterior designs, of which Murray says, “Surely
in the whole realm of Greek vase-painting there is hardly to be met
with a finer conception” than the figures of the two wind-gods or
death-deities carrying off the body of the dead warrior. Nor are the
figures of Amazons arming on the other side of inferior merit. So
marked, indeed, is the superiority of these designs to Pamphaios'
ordinary work, that most authorities are agreed in attributing them to
another artist belonging to a more advanced school—namely, Euphronios.
We have after all no certain proof that the _painting_ of the cup is
Pamphaios’ handiwork, and we can only say that, if it is, it betokens a
most surprising outbreak of artistic power.

Of the other artists in this cycle _Hischylos_ appears chiefly as a
potter for other artists; for Sakonides he made a (B.F.) kylix, for
Epiktetos four, and for Pheidippos one. A B.F. plate, two “mixed” cups,
and one R.F. cup bear his name alone. He always signs with ?p???se?,
but it is not improbable that he was responsible for the interior B.F.
designs on three of the cups made for Epiktetos. _Pheidippos_ is only
known from the one cup already mentioned. _Euergides_ made three cups,
_Epilykos_ three,[1321] _Hermaios_ five[1322] (one of which bears a
figure of Hermes, perhaps by way of a sort of canting heraldry), and
_Sikanos_ one plate. The cups by _Chelis_ number five, of which one has
a B.F. interior.

=Chachrylion=, who stands on the verge of the next period, calls for
more detailed treatment, especially since the exhaustive discussion of
his work by Hartwig.[1323] Sixteen cups signed by him are known, two
having been discovered since Klein made his list; he also acted as
potter for Euphronios on one occasion. He always signs ?p???se?, but we
may assume that this includes the decoration of the vases. With him we
enter upon the period in which the use of “favourite names” by
vase-painters becomes regular, those employed by Chachrylion being
Leagros and Memnon. The former name is also used by Oltos, Euthymides,
and Euphronios, and the names of Epidromos and Athenodotos belong to
this period, if not to this cycle. A number of vases with the name
Memnon have no signature, and these have usually been attributed _en
bloc_ to Chachrylion. But it has been pointed out by Hartwig that some
of them must belong to an earlier stage, standing in much closer
relation to the B.F. vases. Besides the sixteen signed vases, Hartwig
assigns to him seven with the name of Epidromos, and two others with
that of Leagros in addition, and another without name. A remarkable
number of these cups have no exterior decoration.

Chachrylion’s work is in character essentially transitional. Some of
his cups[1324] are in the style of the archaic decadence, before the
new influence of Euphronios, but he never freed himself from the
trammels of the severe style. He drops the Epictetan method of
decorating the exterior with large eyes and animals bounding the scene,
and uses large palmettes under the handles; but his interior scenes are
still bordered with a plain ring, instead of the later maeander. He is
never altogether happy in his exterior designs; hence his preference
for interiors, in which, it may be noted, he is almost the first to
introduce more than one figure.[1325] His figures, like those of
Epiktetos, have slim proportions and small heads, the bodily forms
better rendered than the limbs. He seems to strike a medium between the
vigour of Pamphaios and the refinement of Epiktetos, combining
robustness and grace with a tendency to largeness of style,[1326] which
shows that he is preparing the way for Euphronios.

In summing up the characteristics of the cups of severe style, we note
that they exhibit throughout a development in technique and decoration
rather than in style and drawing. The earliest are little removed from
the later B.F. kylikes with interior designs and large eyes on the
exterior, many having in fact B.F. interiors. With the eyes occupying
so much space, it is rare at first to find anything like a composition
on the exterior; but gradually the eyes disappear, the palmette
ornaments (see p. 414) decrease in size, and the figures extend
themselves into friezes, with definite action. We have scenes of combat
with a marked centre, like a sculptured pediment, group of athletes or
revellers, and mythological or heroic subjects from the stories of
Herakles, Theseus, and Troy.

In the interiors the development is somewhat different. Beginning with
a simple design of a simple figure within a plain circle—at first an
enforced necessity, but subsequently due to choice—the tendency is to
fill in the space more and more as the power of drawing develops, and
the painter casts about for new ideas. Hence, as Klein[1327] says,
“Here we have carrying, lifting, hurrying, running, stooping, dancing,
springing ... and all for the sole purpose of obtaining those movements
of the human body which the space of the vase demanded.” We also note
the almost entire absence of mythological scenes in the interiors;
repose or simple action is all that is aimed at, whereas on the
exteriors scenes of activity or even violence are admitted.

Murray[1328] has pointed out some interesting parallels between the
kylix-interiors and contemporary coins and gems, which show the
vase-painter to have been in full accord with the spirit of the times.
Thus, to take the coins first, the Sphinx of Chios is repeated on the
B.M. vase E 10, the armed warrior of Aspendos on E 11, the Diskobolos
of Kos on E 78, and the squatting Satyr of Naxos on a vase formerly in
the Bourguignon collection.[1329] Among fifth-century gems we find such
subjects as a youth kneeling and holding a jug, a woman at a
washing-basin, a Satyr with wine-skin, a youth fastening his sandal,
and an archer[1330]—all of which occur on the interior of R.F. kylikes.
The beautiful subject of the body of Memnon borne by two genii (see
above), although an exterior subject, may also be mentioned here as
paralleled in a fine gem.[1331]

In Klein’s valuable monograph on early R.F. cup-painting there is a
useful table[1332] setting forth the development of the Epictetan cycle
of cups, both in subject and arrangement. His first class includes the
purely B.F. cups of Nikosthenes and Pamphaios, with the Gorgoneion in
the interior and large eyes on the exterior, which form the prelude to
the R.F. series. In the next stage a B.F. subject, such as a warrior,
horseman, or deer, takes the place of the Gorgoneion; the exteriors are
R.F., but the eyes are retained, allowing only of a single figure each
side. Three of these are painted by Epiktetos, others by Pamphaios and
Chelis. The third stage has only R.F. interiors, the exterior
preserving the same character; instances may be found among the works
of Chelis and Pheidippos. Finally, there is a long series of nearly
eighty cups and plates, many of the former with interior designs only,
in which the eyes are finally dropped, and the exterior subjects are
developed into regular friezes, being often mythological. These include
the majority of the works of Epiktetos, Pamphaios, and Chachrylion, the
latter of whom marks the transition to the next stage.

Turning now to the works of other artists in this period, and passing
over Andokides, whom we have already discussed (p. 386), we find that
=Euthymides= is the most conspicuous name after those of the
cup-painters.[1333] Strictly speaking, he does not belong exclusively
to the severe period, at least in point of date, though his style is
comparatively behindhand; as we shall see, he was partly contemporary
with Euphronios. His style is curiously similar to that of Phintias, as
is shown by the fact that the same unsigned vases have been attributed
to both by different authorities. Five vases bear his signature (in two
cases ???afe, in the others ???afe?), and he gives the additional
information that he was the son of Polios. He uses three ?a???-names—
Megakles, Smikythos, and Phayllos, the first-named being also employed
by Phintias. Two of his vases (in Munich; see Fig. 137) are amphorae,
one a hydria, one a _psykter_, and one a circular dish or plate like
those of Epiktetos.

The similarity of his work to that of Phintias suggests that they were
partners. A vase with the inscription t?? t??de, ????µ?de?, “This [vase
I dedicate] to thee, Euthymides,” has been attributed by Hartwig to
Phintias, and may be an interesting instance of the friendship existing
between the two artists. On the other hand, Euthymides seems to have
viewed with apprehension and jealousy the growing success of his
junior, Euphronios. On one of the Munich amphorae he places the
boast—by no means with justification—“Euphronios never made the like”
(?? ??d?p?te ??f??????).

The height of his activity may be placed about 500–490 B.C., a date
which suits the use of the name Megakles. This probably denotes the
grandfather of Alkibiades and uncle of Perikles, who was ostracised in
487 B.C. The same name, as is well known, occurs on the warrior-tablet
found on the Acropolis[1334], and on the strength of this Hoppin
attributes the tablet to Euthymides.[1335] There is, however, no proof
that such tablets, which belong rather to the higher branch of painting
at that time, were made by vase-painters.

The style of Euthymides and his preference for the amphora seem to
indicate that he was much under the influence of Andokides. He still
clings to the old style in his methods of decoration, as in the borders
of the designs. His individuality, says Hoppin, is best shown in his
draperies, the details of which are faintly indicated in red, and he
shows some skill in foreshortening, but his heads are too large. He
also exhibits a strong preference for mythological subjects, such as
the arming of Hector, but usually balances these subjects with a
genre-scene from the gymnasium or symposium.

His partner =Phintias=[1336] is distinguished from him in one
respect—namely, that he painted cups as well as other shapes. But his
cups have nothing in common with his Epictetan cycle, and seem rather
to have been under the influence of Euphronios. We may therefore regard
him as another connecting-link between the severe and strong periods.
Eight vases are actually signed by him,[1337] though one of these has
no subject, being merely modelled in the form of a head (see below, p.
493); but from his use of Megakles and Chairias as ?a???-names, and
other indications, Hartwig has been enabled to add to the number no
less than twelve cups and eleven other vases[1338].

The cups are mostly small, with interior designs only, and those single
figures; his composition is not a strong point, but the single figures
are good, especially the nude forms; his draperies are stiff, but
effective, and his heads are influenced by Euphronios, as Hartwig notes.

A pair of painters that may be linked together are =Oltos= and
=Euxitheos=, the former the painter, the latter the potter, of a kylix
in Berlin (2264). We also have a magnificent kylix at Corneto, with the
name of Euxitheos as potter, probably painted by Oltos; on one side of
the exterior is an assemblage of the gods, on the other a Dionysiac
scene.[1339] In the British Museum is an amphora, also made by
Euxitheos (E 258; signed on handles), with a single figure each side
(Achilles and Briseis), and a krater in the Louvre with the ?a???-name
Leagros seems to be by the same hand.[1340] Hartwig, who regards Oltos
as the painter in each case, shows his connection on the one side with
Andokides and Euthymides, on the other with Hieron. He displays a
preference for large figures and for Dionysiac subjects.

The one vase of _Hypsis_, a hydria,[1341] must be of early date; the
shape, ornamentation, and arrangement of the designs are purely B.F. in
character. We have two vases of the _alabastron_ form[1342]—an unusual
one for signatures—made by _Hilinos_ and painted by _Psiax_, and a
kylix of Epictetan style in Munich signed by the latter.[1343] The two
former are each decorated with two figures in a simple, severe, yet
effective style; the latter has a B.F. interior (figure of Seilenos),
and R.F. exterior with the large eyes, and a warrior on one side only.
In the latter case the signature is simply [FS???S], without a verb; on
the Odessa vase the imperfect tense ?p??e? is used, the casual use of
which is a characteristic of the transitional period.[1344] Mr. Hoppin
has given several reasons for attributing an early date to those two
artists (about 520–500), not the least convincing of which is the use
of a B.F. technique and of the large eyes.

We now find ourselves at the point where =Euphronios= forces his way to
the front as the great master in the new school of painting in which
the influence of Kimon of Kleonae can be traced.[1345] Hartwig compares
this new departure of art to the Italian schools of painting in the
fifteenth century, in which also naturalism and a knowledge of
perspective become the characteristics in which they differ most
markedly from their predecessors. The early work of the school of
Euphronios, which we may place about 500–480 B.C., is best illustrated
by the series of cups with the ?a???-name Leagros, which must belong to
this time. This name is found on two of the vases signed by Euphronios,
the Antaios krater in the Louvre and the Geryon kylix in Munich, of
which Chachrylion was the potter. The fact that it is found also on
some B.F. vases[1346] seems to argue, not for its appearance previous
to this date, but rather for the view that at the beginning of the
fifth century there was still a preference for the old method for
certain shapes—the amphora, hydria, and lekythos. It may also be
inferred that Euphronios had already appeared on the scene while
Chachrylion, Pamphaios, and Oltos were still painting more in the
manner of Epiktetos, and hence we are justified in regarding those
artists as belonging to the severe style, even though they overlap with
the succeeding period.

The labours of Hartwig and other scholars have now made it possible to
associate an extensive series of vases with the school of Euphronios,
but there are only ten in existence which actually bear his
signature.[1347] They are as follows (the order being roughly
chronological):—

  (1) Krater in Louvre, G 103: Herakles and Antaios; musical
     performance. Pottier, _Louvre Atlas_, pls. 100, 101.

  (2) Psykter in Petersburg, 1670: Banquet of Hetairae.

  (3) Kylix in Munich, 337: Herakles and Geryon. Furtwaengler and
     Reichhold, pl. 22 = Plate XXXVIII.

  (4) Kylix in Louvre, G 104: Theseus’ adventures. Furtwaengler and
     Reichhold, pl. 5; _J.H.S._ xviii. pl. 14.

  (5) Kylix in Bibl. Nat., 526: Scene from Doloneia (fragmentary).
     Klein, _Euphronios_,^2 p. 137.

  (6) Kylix in Brit. Mus., E 44: Herakles and Eurystheus. Furtwaengler
     and Reichhold, pl. 23.

  (7) Kylix in Perugia: Achilles and Troilos scenes. Hartwig, pls. 58–9.

  (8) Kylix in Berlin, 2281: Sack of Troy (fragmentary).

  (9) Kylix in Boston: Banquet scenes. Hartwig, pls. 47–8.

  (10) Kylix in Berlin, 2282 (polychrome): Achilles and Diomede.
     Hartwig, pls. 51–2.

In the first three instances he signs ???a?e?, in the rest ?p???se?.

The Louvre krater shows Euphronios in his early manner, when, as Murray
says, “he was in the mood of drawing massive limbs and colossal
proportions.” The “type” of the Herakles and Antaios is interesting as
a reminiscence of the B.F. wrestling-scheme adopted for Herakles and
the Nemean lion (see Chapter XIV.). The chief variation is that the
figures are posed in a sort of elongated isosceles triangle, no doubt
with the intention of showing Herakles’ efforts to raise the giant from
the earth to which he so strenuously clings. In the form of Antaios we
already observe the capacity for rendering a body accurately in
different planes which was one of the chief distinctions of the new
school. On the other hand, the agitated female figures in the
background are depicted in the old quasi-Egyptian attitudes, with
bodies in front view and heads in profile; yet in the treatment of
their draperies there is a great advance.

The Geryon cup (Plate XXXVIII.) is a wonderful combination of
picturesque and effective grouping with elaboration of detail, and is
so far the most naturalistic piece of work that any vase-painter has
produced. Here again the old B.F. “type” is retained, at least for the
Geryon, who appears as the “three men joined together” of the Kypselos
chest,[1348] one of whom falls backward wounded. But the whole scene is
vivid and instinct with life; even Athena and Iolaos, instead of calmly
watching the contest, join in animated comment thereon, and the former
seems to be hastening forward to join in the fray. Not the least
effective part of the design is formed by the group of Geryon’s cows on
the reverse, which show that Euphronios was a keen observer of nature
and anatomy, and the varied poses and skilful grouping of the herd are
striking instances of his art in composition.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                           PLATE XXXVIII

[Illustration: KYLIX BY EUPHRONIOS (IN MUNICH): HERAKLES SLAYING
GERYON.]

                  ------------------------------------

As typical of his later manner (about 480–460 B.C.) we may take the
British Museum kylix and that in the museum at Perugia. They bear
respectively the ?a???-names Panaitios and Lykos, while the
contemporary Berlin cup (2282) has the name of Glaukon. These clearly
form a new group, distinct from the Leagros series, and, if the
historical identification of Glaukon (see p. 404 above, and Chapter
XVII.) is correct, enable us to place them about 470–460 B.C. The
interior group of the British Museum cup shows us two figures, a woman
standing by the side of a man, who is seated to the front and drawn in
a very boldly foreshortened attitude. Their physiognomy, in particular
the large prominent nose, is especially characteristic of Euphronios’
riper style, and in the treatment of the drapery we distinguish a great
advance even on his earlier vases. Not only is it executed with perfect
freedom and naturalness, but even different qualities of material are
indicated, _e.g._ by the use of fine crinkly lines. The Theseus kylix
in the Louvre, which Hartwig regards as the highest point of the R.F.
style, a study in idealism rather than naturalism, is also conspicuous
for its excellence in this respect.

The Troilos kylix in Perugia, which as far as can be ascertained is the
latest of Euphronios’ works, is interesting, apart from its artistic
treatment, as an instance of the current tendency to combine interior
and exterior scenes in one whole, representing distinct or successive
episodes of a single subject. On one side of the exterior, Achilles,
having emerged from his ambush, drags the unfortunate boy by his hair
to the altar at which the tragedy is to be consummated; his horses
betake themselves off with flying reins. Meanwhile, on the other side,
Troilos’ Trojan comrades, as on the François vase, hastily arm
themselves in order to come to his rescue. But the interior scene shows
us that their efforts are in vain; the boy, in whose countenance fear
and agony are admirably depicted, is about to fall a victim to the
sword of his relentless foe, who in a vigorous yet even graceful
attitude raises his arm to deal the death-blow. Of the vase as a whole
Murray says, “There is no mistaking in it the presence of all the best
and strongest qualities of Euphronios, though in a more subdued and
more poetic form. His draperies...are full of refinement and beauty.”

It remains to say a word on Euphronios in another aspect—as a painter
in polychrome on white ground. The Berlin cup No. 2282, sadly
fragmentary as it is, bears not only the signature of Euphronios, but
the ?a???-name Glaukon, to which we have already referred. The method
of painting, to which we have referred on a subsequent page (p. 457),
was one just at its height in the middle of the fifth century. The two
heads, which are the best-preserved parts of the cup, are remarkable
for their breadth and largeness of style, and for their idealising
tendency, which recalls the coins of a slightly later period and such
works of sculpture as the ephebos-head from the Athenian Acropolis, to
say nothing of the sculptures of Olympia.

We must not, however, omit to notice here the views of some recent
writers, who are inclined to doubt whether the paintings on some of
these later vases are actually from Euphronios' hand.[1349] It is
certainly noteworthy that he has ceased to sign ???a?e; but to maintain
that the ?p???se, where no other painter’s name occurs, does not
include the painting of the vase, is to rest on somewhat negative
evidence, and would also lead to the refusal to recognise Chachrylion
and other noted artists as the painters of their signed vases. If,
however, this view is to be accepted, it would entail the attribution
of the scenes on the Troilos cup to _Onesimos_, who painted a cup of
similar style in the Louvre,[1350] of which Euphronios was the potter.
Hartwig thinks that the Berlin cup is not by Euphronios, but would
attribute to him a similar fragmentary cup in the British Museum (D 1).
The beautiful Aphrodite cup in the same collection (D 2) bears the
?a???-name of Glaukon, but in view of what has been said any attempt to
attribute it to Euphronios would be dangerous.[1351]

We now have to deal with a trio of his contemporaries, men of marked
individuality and capacity, who display the same instincts for
naturalism and freedom of style, though no one of them rises quite to
the height of Euphronios’ genius.

Of these =Duris= has left a total of twenty-three signed vases, of
which no less than twenty-one are kylikes, the other two being a
kantharos and a psykter. He signs almost consistently ???a?e, but
?p???se? in addition on the kantharos; he employs three potters at
different times—Python (who worked for Epiktetos), Kleophrades (who
worked for Amasis II.), and Kalliades. Of ?a???-names he uses no less
than five, the first two of which go together in his earlier
period—Chairestratos and Panaitios. The latter name, as we have seen,
was used by Euphronios. On the vases in his later manner the names of
Aristagoras, Hermogenes, and Hippodamas appear. He seems to have been
about ten years the junior of Euphronios, but to what extent he was
influenced by him is uncertain. Murray traces the influence of the
other in his later manner, when he forsakes his old love of figures in
repose for subjects entailing violent action. Hartwig, on the other
hand, attributes this change to the influence of Brygos; and in any
case, it is certain that he never attained to the vitality and freedom
of Euphronios.

His style is so marked that it is possible—apart from the evidence of
?a???-names—to attribute to him many vases not actually signed by him,
as may be gathered from the study of his work by Hartwig.[1352] In his
earlier vases he shows a strong preference for scenes from the
palaestra, and only two are mythological. According to Hartwig it is
these vases that show the closest parallelism with Euphronios, both in
choice of subject and in treatment. The later works show a great and
surprising falling off, and are frequently dull and comparatively
careless. They show, in fact, a change from the perfecting of
naturalism to mere mannerism, and this in spite of the change in
subjects from repose to violent action. It is probable that he fell
away from the influence of Euphronios to that of Hieron and Brygos,
lacking entirely, as he did, the genius of the older artist. On the
other hand, his choice of subjects becomes much more varied, many being
heroic or mythological, and among these scenes from the labours of
Theseus take the place of the older athletic types (cf. p. 418). He is
also fond of banquet-scenes at all times, and found in them scope for
bold foreshortening as applied to figures in repose.[1353]

The best-known vase by Duris is a kylix in Berlin (2285 = Plate
XXXIX.), on the exterior of which are painted scenes from a school. On
one side a boy receives instruction in the lyre, while another stands
before his teacher reading from a roll on which is inscribed the first
line of an epic poem: ???s? µ?? ?µf? S??µa?d???? ?????? ????µa? ?e?de??
(see Chapter XVII.). On the other side, the five figures on which
exactly balance those on the first, we have a lesson on the flute and
in drawing or writing; the seated figure in the middle holds a pen and
an open tablet. The fifth figure in each case is a bearded man, seated
on a stool watching the proceedings. In the field are suspended lyres,
writing-tables, and rolls of manuscript. There is also a beautiful cup
in the Louvre, the interior of which represents Eos with the body of
Memnon; the exterior, Homeric combats.[1354] Of the three examples of
his work in the British Museum, one is occupied with the labours of
Theseus (Frontispiece); another (E 49) shows his love of slim nude
figures, contrasted with careful and formal drapery. The peculiar shape
of the heads should be noticed; also the treatment of the eye, as a
circle with a dot in the centre. Like Epiktetos, a slave of precision,
he in nearly all these cases avoids violence of action, and seeks after
a quiet gracefulness. His peculiarly fine technical skill appears to
have been much appreciated in his day.[1355]

=Hieron= has signed twenty-eight vases, all being kylikes except three,
which are kotylae. His invariable formula is ?p???se?, and the
signature is generally incised on the handle of the vase. Hartwig is
inclined to attribute one or two cups with this signature to another
master, who had a preference for introducing bald-headed figures[1356];
and, in regard to others, there is fairly certain evidence that they
were not painted by him. For instance, a very fine kylix with the
carrying off of Helen bears the name of _Makron_ as painter,[1357] and
it is possible that others are actually painted by that artist, who in
any case must have been a partner of his. His work is regarded by
Hartwig as full of individuality and excellence. Hieron, on the other
hand, is inclined to the repetition of certain types, little
individualised. He seems to have been trained in the school of Oltos
rather than that of Euphronios,[1358] except that he learned from the
latter the use of foreshortening. His only ?a???-name is that of
Hippodamas, also used by Duris.

His subjects comprise scenes from myth and legend, musical and
conversational groups, and Dionysiac scenes. He is fond of decorating
his exteriors with rows of men and women of a somewhat sentimental
type, smelling flowers, or in amorous converse. But he rises to higher
flights in the Berlin cup (2290), with Maenads sacrificing to Dionysos
Dendrites, and still more in the splendid kotyle in the British Museum
(E 140 = Plate LI.), with the gathering of the Eleusinian deities at
the sending forth of Triptolemos (see Chapter XII.).

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                             PLATE XXXIX

[Illustration:

  1, KYLIX BY DURIS (IN BERLIN): SCHOOL SCENE.
  2, KYLIX IN STYLE OF BRYGOS (CORNETO): THESEUS DESERTING ARIADNE.
]

                  ------------------------------------

His figures exhibit a strongly marked type of head, large and simple,
perhaps developed from those of Duris. But it is in the treatment of
drapery that he chiefly excels, especially in the British Museum kotyle
and the Berlin cup. Particular mention should be made of the elaborate
garment worn by Demeter on the former, with its rich figured
embroideries (see Chapter XVI.); and the robes of Persephone, though
simpler in decoration, show an even greater richness of treatment in
the delicate lines of the chiton and the graceful fall of the mantle.
On a cup in Berlin with the Judgment of Paris (Fig. 129) he makes a
notable attempt at landscape, showing Paris seated on a rock,
surrounded by a flock of goats.

=Brygos= has only left eight cups, but they are on the whole of a high
order of merit. The Acropolis excavations yielded a fragment of his
work, showing that the beginning of his career must be placed before
480 B.C. But although he retains some archaisms from his early
training, he stands, as Murray has pointed out, on the threshold of the
fine style, and in some of his compositions there is a distinctly
pictorial tendency. His use of gilding (as on E 65 in B.M.) is also, as
with Euphronios in his polychrome cup, an evidence of advanced work. He
shows in his work more directness and actuality, as compared with the
stateliness and grace of Hieron and Makron, and the infusion of
earnestness and animation into his figures is a typical
characteristic.[1359] He pays more attention to his compositions than
to his single figures, but lacks the rhythm of Euphronios.

His subjects are very varied, and cover almost all the vase-painters'
ground except the palaestra. Hartwig on this account connects him with
the school of Oltos, Hieron, and Peithinos, who preferred erotic and
Dionysiac to athletic subjects, and points out that his use of bold
foreshortening effects need not connote the direct influence of
Euphronios, inasmuch as ?at???afa were by this time the common property
of vase- painters. It is interesting to note that he uses no
?a???-name, and both he and Hieron seem to belong to a time when this
fashion was dying out; by the end of the “strong” period it had
practically disappeared.

To speak of his vases in detail, the British Museum cup has been
praised for the composition and drawing of its exterior designs and its
clever foreshortening. The exterior subject is interesting as being
derived from a Satyric drama. The difference of scale between the
figures of deities and those of the Satyrs reminds us (though there is
of course no question of influence) of the similar treatment of the
east frieze of the Parthenon. It has been suggested by several writers
that the name Brygos implies a Macedonian origin for this painter, and
on these grounds a kylix in the British Museum (E 68) has been
attributed to him which bears inscriptions in the Macedonian or some
kindred dialect—Pilon for Philon, Pilipos for Philippos (see Chapter
XVII.). This cup is interesting for the introduction of a new type,
that of the young dancing girl.[1360] The beautiful cup on Plate XXXIX.
(fig. 2) has also been referred to him. Among other interesting
subjects are the Triptolemos cup in Frankfurt, the cup with the
Judgment of Paris (which may be compared with that of Hieron), and the
Sack of Troy cup in the Louvre (Plate LIV.). This latter subject we
have already seen treated as a whole by Euphronios, though previously
it had only appeared in the form of isolated episodes; but the growing
tendency to pictorial treatment of such subjects is well illustrated by
the cup of Brygos and the later Vivenzio hydria in Naples.

=Peithinos= is a master who has been largely rediscovered by Hartwig.
Only one cup with his signature is known, a fine example in Berlin
(2279) with the Euphronian ?a???-name Athenodotos, and the interior
subject of Peleus seizing Thetis, treated with great decorative effect.
Hartwig traces his style in eight more cups, chiefly with erotic and
banqueting subjects, and points out among the former an early instance
of sentimentality in vase-painting in the figure of a love-sick man. He
characterises his style as “over-ripe archaism,” with a slight
reversion to the mannerisms of Exekias, and great attention to detail
in general. He sees in Peithinos the first instance of the pictorial
tendency of which we have spoken, contrasting him with Euphronios and
other painters who were always in the first instance draughtsmen.

In the Berlin Museum there is a magnificent cup (2278)[1361] purporting
to be made by _Sosias_, a name which does not otherwise occur.[1362] In
the absence of indications of the painter, Hartwig and Furtwaengler are
inclined to think that the decoration may be the work of Peithinos; but
this can hardly amount to more than a matter of individual opinion. It
is one of the most sumptuously decorated cups of this period that we
possess, but the exterior is unfortunately greatly damaged. In the
interior Achilles is represented binding up the wounded arm of his
comrade Patroklos. The expressions of the figures and the remarkable
foreshortening of Patroklos’ right leg are indications of the admirable
skill of the painter, whoever he may have been. On the exterior is an
assemblage of gods and goddesses to receive Herakles on his entry into
Olympos, including seventeen figures in all, distinguished by
inscriptions.

In the later chapters of his great work Hartwig has disentangled the
styles of several masters of this period, though not in every case is
he able to give their names; but some vases can be grouped together by
means of ?a???-names or by special peculiarities, such as the use of a
conventional foliage-ornament. They are, however, for the most part of
inferior merit to those of the painters hitherto discussed. Among the
painters’ names are those of Amasis II., Apollodoros, and Onesimos; the
latter has already been mentioned in connection with Euphronios.

Generally speaking, the chief characteristic of the cups of this period
is the tendency to treat the interior and exterior as representing
successive episodes of one theme,[1363] as in the Troilos cup of
Euphronios, or at least as having some connection, more or less
definite, as in the Theseus cup of the same master.

Both in exterior and interior designs the development of composition is
very strongly marked, and there is a notable tendency to enhance the
effect of interior scenes by rich decorative borders. Even in the work
of individual painters a great development is to be observed, showing
how rapid the growth of artistic power was at this time; and thus we
are able to distinguish in Euphronios and Duris an earlier and a later
manner. As Hartwig has said (p. 95), the period of progress associated
with the names of Euphronios and Brygos is characterised by an
individuality and freedom which were partly the cause and partly the
effect of a closer study of nature and an increased capacity for
rendering it.

Among other artists of the time, almost the only conspicuous name is
that of _Smikros_, the painter of two stamni, in the British Museum (E
438) and Brussels,[1364] and also most probably of a “Nolan” amphora in
the Louvre (G 107), which is inscribed [????? S????O? ?????], “This is
evidently Smikros’ work.” He signs in both the former cases with
???a?e?. He appears, says M. Gaspar, as a rival of Euphronios and
Duris, but fails in the attempt to equal their achievements in
vividness, originality, and faithful reproduction of the human figure.
The Brussels stamnos is interesting as representing inscribed persons
from ordinary life, just as Phintias (see p. 429) introduces on a vase
figures of the artists Tlenpolemos and Euthymides. Klein also
attributes to him a krater at Arezzo[1365] with the ?a???-name
Pheidiades, which occurs on the signed vases. It is remarkable for the
treatment of the subject (Herakles and the Amazons) in the style of the
B.F. vases.

The next development of R.F. vase-painting, which presents all the
characteristics of the best period of Greek art and of the highest
point to which that art attained, is that called the =fine style=. In
this the influence of painting first really begins to manifest itself,
especially that of the Polygnotan school, which covers the years
470–440 B.C. It is shown alike in composition and in drawing, and to a
lesser degree in the colouring; but the general use of colours and
gilding on vases really belongs to the succeeding stage. As regards the
drawing, the figures have lost the hardness which at first
characterised them; the eyes are no longer represented obliquely, but
in profile; the extremities are finished with greater care, the chin
and nose are more rounded, and have lost the extreme elongation of the
earlier schools. The limbs are fuller and thicker, the faces noble, the
hair of the head and beard treated with greater breadth and mass, just
as subsequently the painter Zeuxis gave more flesh to his figures in
order to make them appear of greater breadth and grandeur, like Homer,
who represented even his women of larger proportions.[1366]

The great charm of these designs is the beauty of the composition, and
the more perfect proportion of the figures. The head is an oval,
three-quarters of which forms the distance from the chin to the ear;
the disproportionate length of limbs has entirely disappeared, and the
countenance assumes a natural form and expression. The folds of the
drapery, too, are freer, and the attitudes have lost their old
rigidity. It is the outgrowth of the life and freedom of an ideal
proportion, united with careful composition. Before the introduction of
the Polygnotan style of composition, the figures are generally large,
and arranged in groups of two or three on each side, occupying about
two-thirds of the height of the vase; but the pictorial influence is
more in the direction of smaller figures, grouped at different levels.
Figures in full face are now much less uncommon. In some of the larger
vases with figures on both sides, such as the kraters, the reverse side
is not finished with the same care as the obverse, being intended to
stand against a wall, or at least to be less prominently seen.

The career of Polygnotos extends from 478 B.C. to 447 B.C., as far as
can be gathered from the various works on which we know him to have
been engaged. In 478 he painted frescoes for the temple of Athena Areia
at Plataea, in 474 he decorated the Theseion and Anakeion at Athens, in
460 he worked with Mikon on the Stoa Poikile, and from 458 to 447 he
was engaged on his great paintings of the ????? ???s?? and ?????a for
the Lesche at Delphi.[1367] As all these paintings are described more
or less in detail by Pausanias, their subjects form a valuable clue to
the investigation of his influence on the vases.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 103. KRATER OF POLYGNOTAN STYLE IN LOUVRE:
  THE SLAYING OF THE NIOBIDS.
]

At first, indeed, this is limited to single figures or motives[1368];
it is not until about 470 that his method of composition, with its
rough perspective and variety of level, finds its way on to the vases.
The oldest vase on which these new features appear is the krater from
Orvieto in the Louvre,[1369] which has usually been placed about 470,
though at first sight it appears to be later; but certain small details
of an archaic character point the other way. The main subject is a
group of Argonauts, which has been variously interpreted, but Robert
suggests that the scene represents their preparations for departure,
and is thus able to associate it with a painting by Mikon in the
Anakeion, on which that subject was employed. The various vases which
depict the story of Theseus’ visit to Amphitrite[1370] are referred
also by Robert to an original by Mikon in the Theseion (about 470
B.C.). The cup of Euphronios (p. 431) and the Girgenti krater represent
a stage of the subject contemporary with that painter; on the Bologna
krater we have a reduced version of his work; and on the Tricase vase
from Ruvo, which belongs to the school of Hermonax (see below) a
simpler form of the myth occurs, contemporary with the preceding.

The technique and colouring of Polygnotos’ works find their reflection
principally in the polychrome vases (see below, p. 455). On the
red-figured vases of this period we must look for his influence rather
in the arrangement and poses of the figures, the methods of indicating
locality, and the attempts at perspective. Professor Robert’s ingenious
reproductions of his paintings[1371] may be profitably compared with
such vases as the Orvieto krater, the Blacas krater in the British
Museum (E 466 = Plate LIII.), or the somewhat later hydria of Meidias
(see below). The principle adopted was that of arranging the figures,
not in even rows or in proper perspective, but at different levels,
those in the background being sometimes half hidden by rising ground.
It is a principle which we shall find even more fully developed in the
South Italy vases of the succeeding century; but it was at the time of
its appearance quite sudden and unexpected, contradicting at first
sight the decorative principles of vase-painting. Polygnotos was also
fond of indicating characteristics of his personages or allusions to
their history by means of subtle touches or actions. Thus Phaedra was
represented in a swing, Eriphyle with her hand on her neck (with
reference to the necklace), Theseus and Peirithoos in sitting postures,
and so on. This is quite in the manner of the fifth-century
vase-painter. Finally, the late F. Dümmler has pointed out that his
influence is possibly to be traced in another manner on certain vases,
viz. in the use of the dialect of Paros and Thasos for the inscriptions
instead of Attic forms.[1372] It should be borne in mind that he was a
native of Thasos, and would naturally have used his native dialect for
the inscriptions over his figures.

The following is a list of vases showing Polygnotan influence:

(1) In types and motives only (470–460 B.C.)[1373]:

  B.M. E 170, 450, 469; Berlin 2403 = Reinach, i. 450; Naples 2421
      = Reinach, ii. 278 and 3089 = Millingen- Reinach, 33;
      Reinach, i. 184 (two vases), 218, 221; _Jahrbuch_, 1886, pl.
      10, fig. 2; Millingen-Reinach, 49–50; Furtwaengler, _50^{tes}
      Winckelmannsfestprogr._ pl. 2[1374]; Louvre A 256 =
      _Jahrbuch_, 1887, pl. 11 (Dümmler).

(2) In method of composition (460–440 B.C.)[1375]:

  B.M. E 224, E 466, E 492; Berlin 2588 = Reinach, i. 217 and 2471 =
      _Coll. Sabouroff_, i. 55; Naples R.C. 239 = Reinach, i. 482;
      Jatta 1093, 1095, 1498 = Reinach, i. 175, 119, 111; Petersburg
      1792, 1807 = Reinach, i. 1, 7; Reinach, i. 522, 5 (in Bologna);
      _Ant. Denkm._ i. 36 (_ibid._); Reinach, i. 191; and reflecting
      the style of Polygnotos or of Mikon: Reinach, i. 226–27 =
      _J.H.S._ x. p. 118 (Louvre); Reinach, i. 232 = _J.H.S._ xviii. p.
      277.

To these may perhaps be added:

  Naples 2889 = Raoul-Rochette, _Mon. Inéd._ pls. 13–4; Athens 1921 =
      Reinach, i. 511; Berlin 2326 (see _Jahrbuch_, 1887, p. 172).

In this stage, as has been noted, artists’ signatures are far more rare
than in either of the two preceding, and cup-painters in particular are
few and far between. The ?a???-names, too, have almost entirely come to
an end. Of the cup-painters the only known names are those of Aeson,
Erginos and Aristophanes, Hegias, Hegesiboulos, Sotades, and Xenotimos,
and of these four (Aeson, Hegesiboulos, Hegias,[1376] and
Xenotimos[1377]) are only represented by single specimens. Two very
fine cups, made by _Erginos_ and painted by _Aristophanes_, are in the
museums of Berlin and Boston respectively,—the former decorated with
scenes from the Gigantomachia within and without (Fig. 112); the latter
has in the interior Herakles rescuing Deianeira from Nessos, on the
exterior a battle of Centaurs and Lapiths. An unsigned duplicate of
this vase was acquired by the Boston Museum at the same time.[1378] The
vase by _Aeson_ is decorated with scenes from the labours of
Theseus.[1379]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                                PLATE XL

[Illustration:

  CUPS BY SOTADES.
  1, IN BOSTON; 2, BRIT. MUS.: POLYEIDOS IN THE TOMB OF GLAUKOS.
]

                  ------------------------------------

_Sotades_ stands apart from his contemporaries as an artist of much
individuality, with a tendency to great refinement and delicacy in his
work. He has left one R.F. kantharos and some half-dozen vases of the
white-ground type, two with very interesting subjects (see also p.
457); all but the first were formerly in M. van Branteghem’s
collection, and these are now divided between the British and Boston
Museums. He is remarkable for his extremely delicate cups, with handles
in the form of a chicken’s merrythought, and he also made two phialae
with white interior and moulded exterior painted in rings of red,
white, and black; on the interior of one of these a cicala (t?tt??) is
ingeniously modelled so as to appear resting there (Plate XL.).
_Hegesiboulos_, one of whose vases was also in the Van Branteghem
collection,[1380] seems to have been an artist of similar tendencies.

Of the rest, _Epigenes'_ name appears on a small kantharos in the
Bibliothèque Nationale, and those of _Megakles_ and _Maurion_ on
pyxides. Among the painters who exercised their skill on larger vases
the most noteworthy is _Polygnotos_, who has left an amphora and two
stamni. The similarity of his name to that of the great contemporary
painter has naturally led to conjectures as to a possible connection of
the two, which has been discussed by Professor Robert in publishing two
of the vases with his signature.[1381] His conclusion is that they
belong to the period 460–450 B.C., in which the influence of the
painter is beginning to make itself felt, but only in isolated figures
and motives, not, as in a class of which we shall presently speak, in
the composition of scenes. The earliest of the three is the stamnos in
Brussels, with the subject of Kaineus overwhelmed by the
Centaurs[1382]; next comes the stamnos with the combat of Herakles and
the Centaur Dexamenos[1383]; and lastly the British Museum
amphora,[1384] which retains an archaic form, but in its style and
drawing presents no traces of archaism.[1385] In the reverses of his
vases, with their tendency to meaningless and carelessly drawn figures,
we seem to trace the beginnings of the decadence. _Hermonax_, who
painted four stamni and a “pelike,” seems to be closely associated in
style with Polygnotos.[1386] Professor Robert would also attribute to a
pupil of Polygnotos three fine R.F. cups of about 445 B.C.—the Kodros
cup in Bologna (Chapter XIV.) and two in Berlin (2537–38), with the
subjects of the birth of Erichthonios, and Aegeus consulting the oracle
of Themis.

_Nikias_, of whom we have only one example, a bell-shaped krater in the
British Museum (formerly in the Tyszkiewicz collection),[1387] is
evidently, from the form of the vase and the style of the paintings, an
artist of the latest stage of R.F. vase-painting at Athens. He is,
however, remarkable in one respect, namely the form of his
signature,[1388] which gives not only his parentage but—a unique
instance among vase-painters—his deme:

                 ????a? ??µ??????? ??a???s??? ?p???se?.

The subject of the vase is the torch-race, one often found on late
Athenian kraters, and seldom at an earlier date.

Lastly we have a hydria from the hand of _Meidias_, in the British
Museum, which originally formed part of the Hamilton collection (Plate
XLI.). Winckelmann estimated it above all other vases known to him, and
regarded it as illustrating the highest achievement of the Greeks in
the way of drawing. His criticism is hardly even now out of date, in
spite of the enormous number that now challenge comparison with it, as
far as concerns the beauty and richness of the drawing and of the
composition. The artist, says Furtwaengler, “revels in a sea of beauty
and grace; youth and charm are idealised in his work.” In point of
style it belongs to the epoch of the Peloponnesian War, about 430–420
B.C., but so admirable is the work that it can hardly be placed so low
as the contemporary vases of “late fine” style, with their patent
evidences of decadence. Meidias may therefore fairly be included with
the foregoing.[1389]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                               PLATE XLI

[Illustration: HYDRIA BY MEIDIAS (BRITISH MUSEUM).]

                  ------------------------------------

The subjects represented are arranged in two friezes all round the
vase, the upper containing the rape of the Leukippidae by the
Dioskuri—a subject which had been chosen by Polygnotos for his painting
in the Anakeion.[1390] Not only this, but all the vases with the same
subject are doubtless largely indebted to the painting for their ideas,
especially in the system of composition with figures at different
levels.[1391] On the lower row the front view shows Herakles in the
garden of the Hesperides, and at the back is a group of Athenian tribal
heroes.[1392] All the figures have their names inscribed; these,
together with the artist’s signature, were only first noticed by
Gerhard in 1839. Among the details of treatment are to be noted the
exquisitely fine lines for the folds of drapery, and the elaborate
chequers and other patterns representing embroidery, the occasional use
of gilding, the attempts to impart expression to faces by means of
wrinkles, and the characteristic rendering of the hair with wavy dark
lines of thinned black on a brown wash.

The last artist of Athenian origin who remains to be mentioned is
_Xenophantos_, a contemporary of Meidias, whose name appears on a vase
found at Kertch and now in the Hermitage at Petersburg.[1393] Here he
expressly calls himself an Athenian, and it has therefore been supposed
that the vase was made on the spot, otherwise it would not be obvious
why he should proclaim his nationality (see below, p. 464). The chief
feature of the vase—a lekythos of the “bellied” type so common at this
stage—is the use of figures moulded in relief and applied to the
surface, in conjunction with gilding and a lavish use of white colour.
The subject is the Persian king hunting.

The vases of the =late fine= style, into which the “fine” style merges
about the year 430 B.C., may be divided into two classes,—that of the
larger vases, chiefly kraters, in which the pictorial traditions of the
Polygnotan vases are carried on and developed, and the influence of
contemporary art makes itself felt; and that of the smaller types, such
as the pyxis and the wide-bellied lekythos, in which new features and
new subjects are introduced (cf. Plate XLII.).

The former class is chiefly made up of the vases found in Southern
Italy, in the Crimea, the Cyrenaica, and the Greek islands, which are
apparently of Athenian, not local, fabric; but they are comparatively
rare at Athens and in Greece Proper, where the smaller vases have been
found in considerable numbers. It may be found convenient to deal first
with the latter, as more typically Athenian, while the larger vases
serve as a connecting-link with the succeeding fabrics dealt with in
the next section.

In these vases linear drawing reaches its limits in respect of perfect
freedom and refinement of detail; but it is at a severe cost. The
artist seems to have lost interest in his subject when it no longer
required an effort to execute it, and is content to decorate his vase
with a few stock figures in conventional attitudes, uncharacterised by
action or attribute. Frequent faults of design may be observed, such as
coarseness of drawing or negligence in the laying on of the black
varnish. The artist works by routine, and appears to be nonchalant and
bored. Mythological scenes become exceedingly rare, and are confined to
Dionysos or Aphrodite with their attendant personifications, and the
compositions are fanciful or decorative in character, without any
suggestion of particular events or actions. The all-pervading presence
of Eros is another feature which is new to vase-painting, but
henceforward his position is established. An even greater novelty is
the preponderance

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                              PLATE XLII

[Illustration:

  VASE OF “LATE FINE” STYLE.
  (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

                  ------------------------------------

of subjects connected with the daily life of women or children—the
toilet, the occupations of every-day life, or nuptial ceremonies; and a
whole series of small jugs, themselves in all probability toys, depicts
the various games in which the Athenian child delighted—the hoop, the
go-cart, and the ball, or his pet animals (cf. Plate XLII.).

The shapes most popular in this group are, as we have indicated, the
oinochoë, the wide-bellied lekythos, and the pyxis (Plate XLII.).
Milchhoefer, in a most important article,[1394] regards the lekythi
as more instructive than any other group for illustrating the later
developments of R.F. vase-painting. Beginning with early examples of
the fine style,[1395] they extend to the very end without any gaps,
the tradition being further continued in Apulia. They exhibit a
development from simple to rich compositions, from “strong” style to
perfect freedom. In the latest examples, such as that by Xenophantos,
we see the straining after novelty which marks the decadence, in the
introduction of figures in relief applied to the surface of the vase,
as well as in the increase of polychromy and gilding. Among the finer
vases we may note a hydria at Karlsruhe (259) with the Judgment of
Paris, in which may be traced the hand of Meidias; the lekythos in
the British Museum from Cyprus (E 696), with Oedipus slaying the
Sphinx, in which the figure of Athena with its white coating is
clearly reminiscent of the gold-and-ivory Parthenos statue; and two
pretty lekythi from Apollonia, in Thrace, with the subject of
incense-gathering. There are also two pyxides in the British Museum
(E 773–4), on which are groups of women, with fancy names added to
give interest to the scene: thus Klytaemnestra, Danae, and Iphigeneia
occur all together, and the Nereids are engaged in the every-day
occupations of the women’s apartments.

From a technical point of view, the principal change is in the
increased use of gilding and polychrome colouring. The former, employed
exceptionally by Euphronios and Brygos, now becomes the rule, and
concurrently the use of white for flesh-tints, as in the figure of
Athena just mentioned, and of red, green, and blue for draperies,
becomes more and more general. The gilding was applied for small
details, such as wreaths, and for the hair; and the places where it was
to be applied were marked by low relief. It was fixed in the form of
gold-leaf by means of a yellowish gum. Jahn, who some years ago
collected the list of vases with gilding,[1396] reckoned fifty-one
known to him, chiefly from Kertch; and Heydemann and Collignon[1397]
have since added several to the list, chiefly from collections at
Athens. They have been found not only in Athens and Kertch, but at
Corinth, Megara, Hermione, Thebes, and in Acarnania and Thrace.

In the larger vases of this period the pictorial method of the
preceding phase is, as might have been expected, greatly developed.
Among the vases of undoubted Attic origin we have, first of all, the
Meidias hydria and its companion vase, the Karlsruhe hydria with the
Judgment of Paris[1398]; and, secondly, the great Gigantomachia vase
from Melos in the Louvre, which contains no less than forty-seven
figures.[1399] Another fine instance is the polychrome Kameiros vase in
the British Museum with the subject of Peleus and Thetis. Robert[1400]
sees in the two latter a possible influence of Parrhasios, who is known
to have paid great attention to drawing, and, in reference to the
Kameiros vase, draws attention to the plastic silhouette effect of the
figures. Parrhasios’ art consisted in giving this effect by his linear
drawing.[1401] The influence of Zeuxis is less apparent, though from
his earlier date it might more naturally have been expected.[1402]

It is, however, still more instructive to trace in this group the
influence of the Parthenon sculptures, which, where it can be observed,
enables us to date the vases approximately as at any rate not earlier
than 438 B.C. On the other hand, it must be borne in mind that sculptor
and painter may often have gone back to the same original type. This
explains the appearance of apparently Pheidian motives on vases of an
earlier style—such as riding youths, water-carriers, etc.—or the
similarity of composition on one of the Parthenon metopes and a vase of
undoubtedly earlier date.[1403] But in one or two instances there can
be no doubt of such influence, most notably in the Athena and Poseidon
vase from Kertch (see below, p. 464). It cannot be without significance
here that the two figures are actually in relief on the vase, and the
parallelism with the pediment (so far as we know the design) is so
close that a copy of it was manifestly the vase-artist’s intention.
Mention has already been made of a figure of the Parthenos on a vase of
this period, and another instance, though not on a painted vase, may be
noted in the polychrome bust of the goddess in terracotta from Athens,
now in the British Museum.[1404] Some instances of this type on vases
may be earlier than the statue; it was not created by Pheidias.[1405]

                  *       *       *       *       *

It has already been mentioned that there is one exception to the
Athenian monopoly of vase-making in the fifth century, and this is in
the local fabrics of Boeotia. Of the Kabeirion vases, which, though in
the B.F. technique, belong to this period, we have already spoken.
There remains a small class—only five examples are at present
known—which appears to have been made at Tanagra. All five evidently
came from the same workshop, and in three cases the provenance is
certainly known. Two are in the British Museum (E 813–4), and three in
the Museum at Athens.[1406] With the exception of E 814 in the British
Museum, which is a pyxis, all are small two-handled cups, with low
feet. The designs are outlined on a background of yellow clay in a
black-brown pigment, the lines being coarsely drawn. Inner details are
indicated by means of thinned-out pigment. That they are of Boeotian
origin is further shown by the ornamentation: the pyxis has round the
sides rows of vertical wavy lines, such as are often seen on the
Boeotian geometrical fabrics (p. 288), and also an ivy-leaf which
recalls the Kabeirion ware. The ornamentation of the hangings round the
chair on Athens 1120 exactly resembles the patterns indicating the
drapery on some of the early Boeotian terracottas.[1407] The subjects,
on the other hand, seem to suggest Athenian prototypes: in the designs
much archaism is to be observed—such as defects in perspective, the
rendering of the eyelashes, and the drawing of the feet in profile, but
with toes in front. Numerous small details point to a date late in the
fifth century, which, in view of the conservative tendencies of
Boeotia, is not unlikely.

[Illustration: FIG. 104. BOEOTIAN KYLIX (BRITISH MUSEUM): GIRL PLAYING
KOTTABOS(?).]

The subjects are of some interest, and include two figures of Herakles,
one bearded, the other youthful; a girl playing kottabos (Fig. 104);
and a cultus-image of an enthroned Chthonian goddess (Demeter or
Persephone), holding a torch, ears of corn, and poppies. These vases
have been collected and fully discussed in an interesting article by
Dr. S. Wide.[1408]

-----

Footnote 1269:

  Klein, _Euphronios,^2_ p. 31 ff.

Footnote 1270:

  See _Berl. Phil. Woch._ 1894, p. 112.

Footnote 1271:

  See Norton in _Amer. Journ. of Arch._ 1896, p. 37.

Footnote 1272:

  Furtwaengler, in _Berl. Phil. Woch._ 1894, p. 112, in repudiating the
  idea that the new style was first introduced in the kylikes, seems to
  have misunderstood Hartwig’s arguments.

Footnote 1273:

  _Jahrbuch_, ii. (1887), p. 159 ff. The alternative view is upheld by
  Klein, _Lieblingsinschr.^2_ p. 26 ff., and he is followed by Murray,
  _Designs on Gk. Vases_, p. 6. Klein compares Epictetan vases with the
  work of Mikon, and also bases his argument on the story of Kimon and
  the bones of Theseus (see p. 418).

Footnote 1274:

  _Inscr. Gr._ i. (_Atticae_), Suppl. pp. 79, 154; _Jahrbuch_, _loc.
  cit._ p. 144.

Footnote 1275:

  Chapter XVII. See also especially Klein, _Lieblingsinschriften_ (2nd
  edn. 1898); Hartwig, _Meisterschalen_; Wernicke, _Lieblingsnamen_;
  and _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, iii. p. 24.

Footnote 1276:

  On the identity of these names in particular, see Klein,
  _Lieblingsinschr_.^2 p. 27 ff.; Murray, _Designs_, p. 6; _J.H.S._
  xii. p. 380.

Footnote 1277:

  Hartwig (p. 11) points out that vase-painters also bear well-known
  names, such as Hieron, Andokides, Aristophanes.

Footnote 1278:

  The name of Leagros also occurs on late B.F. hydriae, _e.g._ B 325 in
  B.M. It is used by four R.F. painters in all.

Footnote 1279:

  _E.g._ _Branteghem Cat._ 57.

Footnote 1280:

  See Hartwig, _Meistersch._ p. 3, and _id._ in _Mélanges d’Arch._
  1894, p. 10. He also cites a vase in Berlin (1906) which bears the
  name Stesileos ?a???. This may refer to the S. who fell at Marathon.

Footnote 1281:

  On the instrument employed, see above, p. 227.

Footnote 1282:

  C. Smith in _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, iii. p. 1.

Footnote 1283:

  See also B.M. E 15, E 458.

Footnote 1284:

  Cf. Pliny’s _In veste rugas et sinus inventit_, of Kimon.

Footnote 1285:

  See _Ath. Mitth._ 1900, p. 40 ff., and above, p. 357.

Footnote 1286:

  See below, p. 427, for fuller details of the early development.

Footnote 1287:

  Cf. the Troilos kylix of Euphronios (below, p. 433).

Footnote 1288:

  See _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, iii. p. 11.

Footnote 1289:

  See _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, iii. p. 14; Urlichs, _Beiträge_, p. 37; and
  cf. p. 135 for a mention of a vase stamped with an owl and
  olive-branch, and supposed to be an official choinix measure.

Footnote 1290:

  xi. 495 B.

Footnote 1291:

  See Reisch in _Röm. Mitth._ v. (1890), p. 313 ff., and below, p. 493.

Footnote 1292:

  Cf. B.M. E 471 ff.

Footnote 1293:

  See _Jahrbuch_, 1894, p. 60.

Footnote 1294:

  See what has been said above on the changes in the form of the
  amphora, hydria, and krater.

Footnote 1295:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1892, p. 105 ff.

Footnote 1296:

  _E.g._ Vienna 234, 339 (the latter given in Fig. 101).

Footnote 1297:

  See also some valuable notes on the subject in Riegl’s _Stilfragen_,
  p. 191 ff.

Footnote 1298:

  B.M. E 4–5; _Arch. Zeit._ 1885, pl. 16, fig. 3.

Footnote 1299:

  B.M. E 17–19; Berlin 2263, 4220; Louvre G 18; Helbig 246 = _Mus.
  Greg._ ii. 70, 2. All these are cups with the name of Memnon ?a???.

Footnote 1300:

  Berlin 2262.

Footnote 1301:

  B.M. E 22, 41; Berlin 2264–65; Louvre G 17.

Footnote 1302:

  _E.g._ Munich 1160 (by Hischylos) B.M. E 37–8, 40.

Footnote 1303:

  As on E 69, 78.

Footnote 1304:

  See also Chapter XVI. § 3.]

Footnote 1305:

  B.M. E 6, 78.

Footnote 1306:

  B.M. E 818.

Footnote 1307:

  See Hartwig, _Meistersch._ p. 321; and cf. B.M. E 68, 718.

Footnote 1308:

  See Furtwaengler, _Eros in d. Vasenm._; Knapp, _Nike in d. Vasenm._

Footnote 1309:

  B.M. E 772–73.

Footnote 1310:

  Notably on the fine kylix by Peithinos in Berlin (Hartwig,
  _Meistersch._ pl. 24). Cf. B.M. E 462, 510, and Furtwaengler and
  Reichhold, _Gr. Vasenm._ pls. 44–5 = Munich 408.

Footnote 1311:

  Cf. also, for varied treatment of the same subject by two artists,
  B.M. E 44 (ext.) with Louvre G 17.

Footnote 1312:

  See Hartwig, _Meistersch._ p. 515 ff.; and for further details,
  Chapter XV.

Footnote 1313:

  See Chapter XV. § 1.

Footnote 1314:

  _E.g._ B.M. E 406 (Lampadedromia); E 298, 460, 469, 270 (musical
  contests).

Footnote 1315:

  General reference may be made to Klein’s _Meistersig._, 2nd edn.,
  supplemented by Hartwig.

Footnote 1316:

  Cf. also C. Smith in _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, iii. p. 21.

Footnote 1317:

  _Euphronios_,^2 p. 14 ff., with list of cups in Appendix.

Footnote 1318:

  B.M. E 18.

Footnote 1319:

  The _type_, it should be noted, is purely B.F. in character.

Footnote 1320:

  _Designs on Gk. Vases_, p. 8.

Footnote 1321:

  The Louvre cup F 129, inscribed ?p?????? ?a???, cannot be assigned to
  him, although Klein did so. See _Monuments Piot_, ix. pp. 157, 168 ff.

Footnote 1322:

  _Él. Cér._ iii. 73; B.M. E 34; _Branteghem Cat._ 28; fragment
  acquired by B.M., 1896; _Boston Mus. Report_, 1903, No. 52.

Footnote 1323:

  _Meisterschalen_, chap. iv.

Footnote 1324:

  Nos. 8–11 in Klein’s list, according to Hartwig, p. 63.

Footnote 1325:

  The earliest example seems to be Reinach, i. 223 = _Wiener Vorl._ D.
  5 (a cup by Pamphaios).

Footnote 1326:

  As in the Epidromos cup (B.M. E 25).

Footnote 1327:

  _Euphronios_,^2 p. 26: cf. Plate XXXVII.

Footnote 1328:

  _Designs on Gk. Vases_, p. 4.

Footnote 1329:

  Reinach, i. 460, 1.

Footnote 1330:

  See Cesnola, _Cyprus_, pl. 39, fig. 8, pl. 40, figs. 11–12; the Satyr
  and archer are among recent acquisitions of the British Museum.

Footnote 1331:

  _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1883, p. 213.

Footnote 1332:

  _Euphronios_, p. 289 ff.

Footnote 1333:

  See Hoppin’s monograph on this painter, _passim_. In addition to the
  five signed vases (for which see Klein, _Meistersig._ p. 194) he
  gives the following as probably Euthymides’ work: B.M. B 254–56, 767;
  Munich 410 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 33; Berlin 2180;
  Reinach, ii. 133.

Footnote 1334:

  ?f. ???. 1887, pl. 6.

Footnote 1335:

  See also _J.H.S._ xii. p. 380.

Footnote 1336:

  See Hartwig, chap. ix. throughout; also Jones in _J.H.S._ xii. p. 366
  ff.

Footnote 1337:

  Klein only knew of four, but Hartwig (p. 168) has added to his list.

Footnote 1338:

  A hydria in Munich (No. 6) is also probably his work. It represents
  his colleague Euthymides and another potter, Tlenpolemos (see p.
  440). Cf. the vase mentioned above, dedicated by Phintias to
  Euthymides.

Footnote 1339:

  Reinach, i. 203.

Footnote 1340:

  See also Hartwig, pl. 6.

Footnote 1341:

  Gerhard, _A.V._ 103 = Reinach, ii. 57. The vase in _Ant. Denkm._ ii.
  pl. 8, is probably not his work, as has been suggested. The
  ornamentation of the hydria is not given accurately by Gerhard (see
  Klein, _Meistersig._ p. 198).

Footnote 1342:

  Karlsruhe 242; _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1894, p. 180 (at Odessa).

Footnote 1343:

  _Amer. Journ. of Arch._ 1895, p. 485.

Footnote 1344:

  It is used by Andokides, Chelis, Euthymides, Pamphaios, and
  Nikosthenes.

Footnote 1345:

  See Klein, _Euphronios_, _passim_; Hartwig, chaps. vii. xviii.;
  Murray, _Designs on Gk. Vases_, p. 11.

Footnote 1346:

  _E.g._ the B.M. hydria B 325: see Klein, _Lieblingsinschr_^2. p. 70.

Footnote 1347:

  Hartwig, p. 152, mentions another possible instance, an amphora in
  the Louvre. All the vases except (9) are published in Klein’s
  _Euphronios_, and all except (8) and (9) in the _Wiener
  Vorlegeblätter_, ser. 5, pls. 1–7. A few more recent publications are
  noted in the list.

Footnote 1348:

  Paus. v. 19, 1.

Footnote 1349:

  Hartwig, _op. cit._ p. 487; Furtwaengler in _Gr. Vasenm._ p. 110
  (denies the B.M. kylix to Euphronios).

Footnote 1350:

  Hartwig, pl. 53.

Footnote 1351:

  As noted on p. 457, it has been attributed by Furtwaengler (with some
  probability) to Sotades. For other attributions of vases to
  Euphronios, see Hartwig, chaps. vii. and xviii.

Footnote 1352:

  _Op. cit._ chaps. x. and xxi.

Footnote 1353:

  A good instance of this is E 50 in the British Museum.

Footnote 1354:

  _Wiener Vorl._ vi. pl. 7.

Footnote 1355:

  Murray, p. 12.

Footnote 1356:

  See his chap. xvii.: “Der Meister mit dem Kahlkopf.”

Footnote 1357:

  Hartwig, p. 301.

Footnote 1358:

  _Ibid._ p. 305.

Footnote 1359:

  Murray, p. 15.

Footnote 1360:

  See Murray, _Designs_, p. 16; Hartwig, p. 321.

Footnote 1361:

  _Ant. Denkm._ i. pls. 9, 10.

Footnote 1362:

  Except in one insignificant instance: see Rayet and Collignon, p. 187.

Footnote 1363:

  Murray (_Designs_, p. 5) notes the same characteristic in the cups
  with genre subjects, as in the B.M. examples E 33, 39, 49, 51, 54,
  55, 61, 68, 70, 71, 78.

Footnote 1364:

  See _Monuments Piot_, ix. pls. 2–3, p. 15 ff·

Footnote 1365:

  _Lieblingsinschr._^2 p. 126 = Reinach, i. 166.

Footnote 1366:

  Quint. _Inst. Or._ xii. 15.

Footnote 1367:

  This chronology is taken from Robert’s _Marathonschlacht_, p. 69.

Footnote 1368:

  Cf. _Jahrbuch_, ii. (1887), p. 170 ff.

Footnote 1369:

  _J.H.S._ x. p. 118. The reverse is illustrated in Fig. 103.

Footnote 1370:

  See _J.H.S._ xviii. pl. 14, p. 276 ff.

Footnote 1371:

  See his monographs on the _Nekyia_ and _Iliupersis_ = _Hallisches
  Festprogramm_, Nos. 16 and 17 (1892–93).

Footnote 1372:

  _E.g._ B.M. E 492; Reinach, i. 217.

Footnote 1373:

  See Robert in _Mon. Antichi_, ix. p. 24; _id._ _Marathonschlacht_, p.
  55.

Footnote 1374:

  The type of Orpheus on this vase is clearly derived from Polygnotos;
  the figure standing with one foot raised, like Antilochos in the
  _Nekyia_, is a well-known motive of his. See Furtwaengler, _op. cit._
  p. 161.

Footnote 1375:

  See Robert, _Nekyia_, p. 43; Dümmler in _Jahrbuch_, 1887, p. 170 ff.

Footnote 1376:

  Stackelberg, pl. 25.

Footnote 1377:

  _Branteghem Cat._ 84 = _Ant. Denkm_, i. 59: see also _ibid._ 85.

Footnote 1378:

  _Report for 1900_, Nos. 17–8.

Footnote 1379:

  In Madrid (_Ant. Denkm._ ii. pl. 1). The vase E 84 in the British
  Museum is very similar, and the style also has affinities with that
  of Aristophanes.

Footnote 1380:

  _Cat._ 167.

Footnote 1381:

  _Mon. Antichi_, ix. pls. 2–3, p. 5 ff.

Footnote 1382:

  _Op. cit._ pl. 2.

Footnote 1383:

  _Ibid._ pl. 3.

Footnote 1384:

  E 284 = Reinach, ii. 123.

Footnote 1385:

  Naples 3089 = Millingen-Reinach, 33 is probably also by Polygnotos.

Footnote 1386:

  The British Museum pelike with the Birth of Athena (E 410) and the
  Tricase vase (_J.H.S._ xviii. p. 279) may perhaps be his work.

Footnote 1387:

  Froehner, _Tyszkiewicz Coll._ pl. 35.

Footnote 1388:

  For facsimile see Chapter XVII.

Footnote 1389:

  The following vases are in the style of Meidias, though not
  necessarily from his hand: Athens 1287 = Reinach, i. 342; Naples,
  S.A. 311 = Reinach, i. 474, 7; _Jahrbuch_, 1894, p. 252; Karlsruhe
  259 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 30; Reinach, i. 472, 1; 476, 2;
  477, 2; 493, 3; Dumont-Pottier, i. pl. 8; Furtwaengler and Reichhold,
  pl. 59.

Footnote 1390:

  Paus. i. 18, 1.

Footnote 1391:

  See Robert, _Marathonschlacht_, p. 97; _Nekyia_, p. 42. On late R.F.
  vases with double friezes see Winter, _Jüngere attische Vasen_, p.
  69, and _Röm. Mitth._ 1897, p. 102. The principle is frequently
  adopted in the vases of Apulia (_e.g._ Plate XLV.); for early Apulian
  examples see p. 485.

Footnote 1392:

  See _J.H.S._ xiii. p. 119.

Footnote 1393:

  _Cat._ 1790 = _Ant. du Bosph. Cimm._ pl. 46 (in colours) = Reinach,
  i. 23. For a curious imitation of this vase, see Naples 2992.

Footnote 1394:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1894, p. 57 ff.

Footnote 1395:

  Naples 3135, according to him, is contemporaneous with the B.M.
  Aphrodite cup (D 2), about 460 B.C.

Footnote 1396:

  _Vasen mit Goldschmuck_ (1865).

Footnote 1397:

  _Gr. Vasenbilder_, p. 2, pl. 1, fig. 3, pl. 9, fig. 1; _Rev. Arch._
  xxx. (1875), pp. 1, 73, pls. 17–20. See also Berlin 2661 = Rayet and
  Collignon, p. 257, and 2705 = Reinach, i. 426, 2.

Footnote 1398:

  Of similar style are the fragment Naples 2664 = Reinach, i. 181, and
  Athens 1259 = Reinach, i. 506.

Footnote 1399:

  _Mon. Grecs_, 1875, pls. 1, 2.

Footnote 1400:

  _Marathonschlacht_, p. 74.

Footnote 1401:

  Cf. Quint. xii. 10, 3, and Pliny, _H.N._ xxxv. 67.

Footnote 1402:

  See Robert, _Iliupersis_, p. 35.

Footnote 1403:

  Cf. Michaelis, _Parthenon_, pl. 4, 25, with a vase in the Vatican
  (Baumeister, i. p. 746); and see _Jahrbuch_, 1887, p. 177, and
  Roscher, i. p. 1355.

Footnote 1404:

  E 716 = _J.H.S._ xv. pl. 5.

Footnote 1405:

  See _Jahrbuch_, 1894, p. 69.

Footnote 1406:

  Nos. 1119–20, and one uncatalogued.

Footnote 1407:

  Cf. _B.M. Cat. of Terracottas_, B 57–8.

Footnote 1408:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1901, p. 143 ff., with pl. 8.




                              CHAPTER XI
                    _WHITE-GROUND AND LATER FABRICS_

    Origin and character of white-ground painting—Outline drawing
      and polychromy—Funeral lekythi—Subjects and types—Decadence
      of Greek vase-painting—Rise of new centres—Kertch,
      Cyrenaica, and Southern Italy—Characteristics of the latter
      fabrics—Shapes—Draughtsmanship—Influence of Tragedy and
      Comedy—Subjects—Paestum fabric—Lucanian, Campanian, and
      Apulian fabrics—Gnathia vases—Vases modelled in form of
      figures—Imitations of metal—Vases with reliefs—“Megarian”
      bowls—Bolsena ware and Calene phialae.


                        § 1. WHITE-GROUND VASES

The method of painting on a white ground, which was brought to such
perfection in the fifth century, really requires a section to itself,
its development being parallel to, yet different from, that of the
painting in red on black. Its genealogy can be traced almost throughout
the period of Greek vase-painting, beginning with the Ionian fabrics of
Rhodes and Samos, through the more developed vases of Naukratis and
Kyrene, until it was introduced at Athens in the latter part of the
sixth century, perhaps, as we have seen (p. 385), by Nikosthenes. The
method was not, of course, new then to Continental Greece. It was the
one usually employed for painting votive tablets or pictures on wood,
the surface of the tablet being prepared by covering it with a thick
slip of creamy-white lustrous character, known as ?e???µa.[1409] Thus
it is used in one of the few examples known of Attic painting, apart
from the vases, the Warrior pinax from the Acropolis, which may be
dated about 500 B.C., and stands midway between frescoes and
white-ground vases (see above, p. 397). Possibly the idea of the white
slip was to get the effect of painting on marble such as we see in the
tombstones of Lyseas and Aineos.[1410]

This method was adhered to throughout the fifth century by all the
great painters, such as Polygnotos, and hence the importance to us of
the white-ground vases of that time, as reflecting their methods, and
in a miniature form the appearance of their works. In the fifth century
the all-important consideration in a picture was perfection of design
and composition; colouring was relatively unimportant, and the
technical processes exceedingly simple, three or four colours alone
being employed. Cicero[1411] tells us that Polygnotos, Zeuxis, and
Timanthes only used four colours—black, white, red, and yellow. It is
interesting to note that these are just the four colours we ordinarily
find on the polychrome vases, the flat tints so frequently employed
being no doubt suggested by the mural paintings.

To go back to the earlier Athenian vases with white ground, we observe
that at first the method of painting in silhouette, in the manner of
the ordinary B.F. vases, obtains exclusively.[1412] About the beginning
of the fifth century this method is superseded by what we may regard as
a transitional class, in which the figures are painted partly in
silhouette, partly in outline, the simple black-on-white design being
preserved, with a very occasional use of purple or yellow.[1413]
According to Winter, the origin of outline drawing of this kind may be
found in the partly outlined female heads which are found on some of
the minor artists’ cups, such as those of Sakonides, Eucheiros, and
Hermogenes.[1414] We need not go as far as he does in explaining the
_catagrapha_ of Kimon (see p. 397) as the replacement of mere
silhouettes by outline drawing, so as to give individuality and variety
to faces; but the vases which he publishes are remarkable for the
highly developed character of the heads depicted thereon.[1415] One in
particular is more like a head by Euphronios than one of the Epictetan
cycle, to which it must belong in point of date. But it must be
remembered that Epiktetos and his school were still hampered by archaic
conventions, while the painter on a white ground was carving out the
way to perfect freedom.

The shapes employed for the new white-ground technique are much the
same as those used in the previous period—the kylix, the lekythos, the
oinochoë, the pyxis, and the alabastron.[1416] But of these only one
retains its popularity for any length of time; in fact, after the
middle of the fifth century it is the only one employed at all. This
shape is the lekythos, on which, indeed, alone the whole development of
white-ground painting can be traced from the B.F. types down to the
fourth century, when it finally disappears. Although not exclusively
the sepulchral vase (as may be seen from the appearance of other vases
on tombs in the painted funeral scenes[1417]), yet for some reason it
came to be regarded as the proper shape for such purposes, and the
fashion of making white lekythi exclusively for the tomb, and decorated
as a general rule with funerary subjects, prevailed for about a hundred
and fifty years. We have elsewhere (pp. 132, 143) noted instances of
its use recorded by Aristophanes.

The introduction of polychromy is a gradual development. At first, as
we have seen, colour is very sparingly employed, only in the use of a
brownish yellow (produced by thinning out the black) for details or
washes, or of a purple or pinkish brown. Subsequently the outlines are
drawn in black or brown, and filled in with black, brown, or purple
washes; the occasional use of a clear, thick, white pigment, standing
out against the cream background, is also to be noted[1418]; and next a
wash of bright red or vermilion is employed. In the final stages of
polychrome painting, during the fourth century, the range of colours is
greatly extended, and blue or green are employed

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                             PLATE XLIII

[Illustration:

  VASES WITH POLYCHROME DESIGNS ON WHITE GROUND.
  (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

                                                     _To face page 456._

                  ------------------------------------

in addition to those already named. The outlines are also painted in
the vermilion colour already mentioned, instead of the black in
previous use. Up to the end of the fifth century the colouring always
preserves a character of soberness and austerity; and such a feature as
the use of gilding[1419] is quite exceptional.

Some of the white-ground kylikes are only partially so; the exterior is
painted in the ordinary R.F. manner, of the “strong” style, as in the
case of the Anesidora cup in the British Museum. On the other hand, a
fine cup at Gotha has a red-figured interior and polychrome
exterior.[1420] In the Munich collection there are three very beautiful
cups of this kind.[1421] The interior subjects are respectively Europa
on the bull, a frenzied Maenad, and Hera. The cup with the Maenad is
attributed by Furtwaengler to the style of Brygos, and may therefore be
dated about 470–460 B.C. It is rare to find a large vase decorated in
this method, but there is a very fine krater of the calyx type in the
Museo Gregoriano at Rome,[1422] which has been attributed to the middle
of the fifth century (contemporary with Euphronios’ later manner); the
subject is the delivery of the infant Dionysos to the nymphs of Nysa,
and is painted throughout in polychrome on a white ground. Of late
years some very fine pyxides in this style have been found in
Greece,[1423] often decorated with marriage scenes, the style of the
painting being contemporary with Duris and Brygos. But for beauty and
delicacy all are surpassed by some of the smaller cups, above all the
Aphrodite cup from Kameiros in the British Museum,[1424] in which
refinement and grace are combined with boldness of conception and
accuracy of drawing in a marvellous degree. Or, again, the group of
cups and bowls by Sotades (see above, p. 445),[1425] some with
mythological or other subjects painted in minute and graceful style,
others of fantastic or unusual shape and decoration, form a unique
series among the white-ground vases.[1426]

To sum up in the words of A. S. Murray the characteristics of these
vases[1427]: “There was thus in the white vases an exceptional
opportunity for purity of outline in the drawing, and it is not without
reason that they are regarded as the best representatives we yet
possess of the great age of Greek fresco-painting, in which also purity
and sweep of outline on a white ground, simplicity of composition, and
a limited scale of brilliant colours, were the chief characteristics.”

It remains now to speak of the funeral lekythi as a distinct class,
their subjects and method of treatment.[1428] Although it was formerly
customary to speak of “vases of Locri” or “vases of Gela” in speaking
of examples found on those sites, it is almost certain that they are
all really of Athenian origin.[1429] Apart from the fact that the great
majority have been found at Athens, there are no special peculiarities
about those from other sites which would justify any such distinction
of fabrics. The same remarks apply to the numerous examples which have
been found of late years at Eretria in Euboea, and have caused some
recrudescence of the theory of non-Attic origin.[1430] But Eretria was
so near to Athens that importation must have been quite a simple
matter. In regard to the Locri vases, it has been noted by M.
Pottier[1431] that they seem to represent an _inferior_, though still
Athenian fabric, in which the white is more lustrous and less flaky
than in the better examples, and the outlines are in black exclusively.
Black silhouettes are occasionally found, and the subjects are not
necessarily funerary.

The funerary subjects fall into four classes; they will be enumerated
in Chapter XV., where examples of each class are given, but may be
briefly recapitulated here, in order to note some artistic
considerations.

(1) The _Prothesis_, or laying-out of the corpse (Plate LV.).

(2) The _Depositio_, or laying of the body in the tomb: chiefly in the
Thanatos and Hypnos type (see Fig. 123, Chapter XIII.).

(3) _The Journey to Hades_; Charon in his bark (see Fig. 122, Chapter
XIII.).

(4) _The Cult of the Tomb_, this being by far the most common of the
four classes (see Plate LV. and Fig. 19, p. 143).

The _Prothesis_ type is an old one, occurring not infrequently on
black-figured vases, especially on the slim “prothesis-amphorae” which
are sometimes found at Athens. M. Pottier reckons ten examples, to
which may be added a fine specimen now in the British Museum (Plate
LV., fig. 1). The _Depositio_ type is somewhat rare; it is occasionally
found in B.F. vases,[1432] but is usually idealised, the body being
carried by winged genii, to whom the names of Thanatos and Hypnos are
usually given. The type, as has been pointed out elsewhere, is
originally mythological, being derived from that of the burial of
Memnon. Some half-dozen examples are known (see Chapters XIII., XV.).
Of the Charon vases M. Pottier reckons twenty-one, which he classifies
under three heads: (1) Charon on the left in a boat, which two or three
persons enter. (2) Charon on the right in a boat; persons ready to
enter. (3) The deceased is seated on a stele at which women make
offerings; Charon approaches in his boat.[1433] The conception is
essentially a pictorial one, and it may reasonably be inferred that it
is a reflection of Polygnotos. The same subdued pathos and the same
style of composition are characteristic of his paintings. Pausanias, in
describing his _Nekyia_ in the Lesche at Delphi, says: “There is water,
which seems intended for a river, evidently the Acheron, and reeds
growing therein ... and there is a boat on the river, and the ferryman
at the oar.”[1434]

In the vases representing the Cult of the Tomb (Plate LV. and Fig. 19),
the normal type is that of two or three persons bringing offerings,
wreaths, vases, etc., to a stele[1435] ornamented with coloured sashes,
or engaged in conversation thereat; sometimes one sits on the steps of
the stele. The persons with offerings are usually feminine; where men
occur, they are either attired as warriors, or stand leaning on a spear
or staff, conversing with the women. The correspondence of some of
these compositions to the “type” of Orestes and Electra meeting at the
tomb of Agamemnon has more than once been noticed, but it does not seem
here to be a case of borrowing the heroic “type,” as in the Thanatos
and Hypnos instance. Where such scenes can be identified on
vases,[1436] they are all of late date and mostly of South Italian
manufacture; and we may rather suppose that the contrary was the case,
and that the lekythos “type” was idealised and borrowed for the Orestes
scene. Moreover, the popularity of the latter subject is probably
largely due to its treatment by the tragic poets.

Among other details of interest in these scenes may be noted the
appearance of the e?d??a or ghosts of the deceased, represented as tiny
hovering winged creatures. M. Pottier has noted eighteen instances, and
the number has since then been greatly increased.[1437] The invariable
youthfulness of the figures—which, it may be remarked, are always
purely impersonal; and mere _types_ of mourners—is noteworthy as a
characteristic of later fifth-century art, which tended to create
ideals of youth and beauty.[1438] This, of course, is everywhere
apparent in sculpture, as in the Parthenon frieze and the works of
Polykleitos; and reminiscences of Pheidian youthful types may be
suggested by some of the figures on the lekythi.[1439] In the figures
of deities the same change was going on, as in the case of Hermes, and
even the aged and grim figure of Charon is toned down on the funeral
vases to a more humane conception. It has also been suggested that the
choice of youthful figures is due to the thought that youth is the
period when bereavement produces its simplest and most natural effects.

The influence of the sepulchral stelae of the fifth and fourth
centuries soon begins to be apparent in the lekythi, especially in the
scenes of tomb-offerings.[1440] Like the vases, the stelae always
varied in merit, some being refined and artistic compositions, others
poor and commonplace. The choice of subjects, indeed, differs in some
degree, the subjects on the stelae relating chiefly to the previous
life of the deceased, those of the vases to the actual death and
burial. But there are many lekythi, the subjects on which are more like
those of the stelae, not being strictly funerary.[1441] Thus we see the
deceased as a warrior charging with a spear or on horseback, like the
Dexileos of the Kerameikos; the young hunter pursuing a hare; the lady
at her toilet with mirror or jewellery in hand, attended by her
maidens, like the charming Hegeso (Plate XLIII.); or the warrior
parting from his spouse.

Regarding the funeral lekythi in their artistic aspect, we note, as M.
Pottier points out, two main characteristics—restraint and uniformity
of composition. The space for the decoration being limited to about
two-thirds of the whole circumference, the figures are necessarily few
in number, varying from one to three, but very rarely more. Emotion and
pathos are produced by the simplest means. Murray instances the
prothesis lekythos in the British Museum (Plate LV. fig. 1) as an
example of deep pathos expressed in a simple, yet strong and rapid
manner, and two others (D 70 = Plate LV. fig. 2, and D 71) as showing
almost tragic emotion expressed only by a few outlines. Uniformity of
composition is manifested in the repetition of types, often copied from
familiar models, yet with an infinite variety of detail (as, for
instance, in the form of the stelae) which does not affect the
constancy of the main idea. In this respect they may be compared with
the terracotta Tanagra figures, of which many are turned out from the
same mould; yet by varying the pose of the head or position of the arms
the artist was able to avoid the absolute identity of any two figures.

The lekythi can hardly be classified chronologically; we cannot say to
what extent the rougher examples may be earlier, and _vice versa_; but
even in the poorest examples skill and lightness of touch are always
discernible. The classification given by M. Pottier,[1442] however, may
serve as a general indication of chronological succession and
development. He collects them under three heads, as follows:

(1) The paste is of a light red colour, the walls thin, and the white
slip unpolished; the main design is first sketched, then painted, the
outlines being usually in red. The ornaments are palmettes and
maeander, in black and red, the subjects almost exclusively funerary.
The slip and colours are delicate, the style fine, and the polychromy
restrained.[1443]

(2) The paste is grey, the walls thicker; the white is sometimes
polished, and the outlines black or brown. The ornaments are palmettes
and maeander, with crosses or stars, in black only. The subjects are
funerary or from daily life, with figures of deities; the style is
still fine, but the polychromy is more varied.[1444]

(3) The clay is red and light, the white unpolished, the outlines
yellow. The slip is not extended to the shoulder, on which is a
tongue-pattern in black; the maeander is careless. The subjects are
either funerary or from daily life, the style negligent; the designs
are almost entirely monochrome.[1445]

               § 2. THE DECADENCE OF GREEK VASE-PAINTING

We have now reached the point at which the centre of ceramic industry
is no longer to be found at Athens, but must be sought in distant
colonies in various parts of the Mediterranean. The extinction of
vase-painting as a decorative art at Athens was brought about as much
by political events as by sheer artistic decadence at the end of the
fifth century. It had until recent years been customary to assume that
red-figured vases continued to be made at Athens through the greater
part of the fourth century; but the evidence of excavations on many
sites has been too decisive for the maintenance of such a view. That
certain classes of ceramic products, such as the Panathenaic amphorae
and the funeral lekythi, still continued to be made we have already
seen; but these are only exceptions, and due entirely to their
religious associations.

The evidence for the revised chronology has been summarised by
Milchhoefer in a paper already referred to,[1446] in which he pointed
out the importance of historical considerations. Even during the
Peloponnesian War the manufacture and export of painted vases must have
been much crippled, and the absence of the later Athenian wares from
the tombs of Etruria clearly shows that commercial relations between
the two countries had ceased.[1447] Similarly intercourse with Campania
largely ceased after the Samnite invasion of 440 B.C., and relations
with Sicily must have been entirely broken off after the outbreak of
hostilities with Syracuse in 427.

Again, in the city of Rhodes, which was founded in B.C. 408, no Attic
vases have been found, while all those from Kameiros must be earlier
than that date.[1448] In Athens itself no R.F. vases of any importance
have been found in fourth-century tombs, although some fragments of
fine style are reported from the tomb of Dexileos, which is not earlier
in date than 394 B.C.[1449] Hence the conclusion is irresistible that
no good Attic R.F. vases can be assigned to the fourth century, which
is only represented at Athens by the funeral lekythi, the Panathenaic
amphorae, and a few isolated, generally inferior, R.F. specimens.

The new centres of vase-painting, from about 400 B.C. onwards, are
three in number—the Crimea, the Cyrenaica in North Africa, and Southern
Italy. Among the vases from the Crimea[1450] are some of the most
magnificent that we possess, which in spite of their florid style and
careless technique are really of considerable merit. They can, however,
hardly be considered to rank more highly than the best of the products
of Southern Italy, which we are now about to consider; in other words,
they belong to a later stage of development than the “late fine” style
of Attic R.F. vases, as represented by the Rhodian “pelike” with Peleus
and Thetis in the British Museum, and the Gigantomachia vase from Melos
in the Louvre. The fine krater with the contest of Athena and Poseidon
at Petersburg (Plate L.) is clearly a reminiscence of the Parthenon
pediment, and, allowing for the difference of style, cannot be earlier
than the closing years of the fifth century. Again, there is the vase
signed by Xenophantos,[1451] who, as we have seen, expressly calls
himself an Athenian, and on this ground has been regarded as a resident
in Panticapaeum (Kertch). The reliefs with which this vase is partly
decorated are examples of a tendency which hardly came into existence
before the fourth century; the subject also is more suggestive of local
taste.

It may be an open question whether these vases were imported from
Athens, but at least the vase of Xenophantos testifies to the existence
of a local fabric at Panticapaeum, and it is not at all unlikely that
the general upheaval brought about by the Peloponnesian War led to a
dispersion of Athenian artists, and thus to the continuance of their
art in other lands, but not in Athens itself. We shall see that this
largely accounts for the origin of the fabrics of Southern Italy. In
any case Panticapaeum was a place of considerable importance in the
fourth century, being the chief place whence the Athenians obtained
their supplies of grain, as we learn from the orations of Demosthenes,
such as the _Contra Phormionem_.

With the Cyrenaica circumstances were no doubt little different. But
the vases from this site, though similar to those of the Crimea, are
mostly inferior, of small size, and often of very rough character. Like
the former they exhibit a preference for polychromy and gilding.
Similar fabrics are also found in the Greek islands, such as Karpathos
and Telos, in the Troad, and elsewhere,[1452] but for the most part of
a very inferior character.

In the tombs of Southern Italy many vases are found representing the
same stage of development as those of the Crimea and Cyrenaica, varying
from large kraters with fine if florid designs, often enhanced by a
lavish use of white pigment, to inferior and almost worthless
specimens. Inasmuch as these vases are not distinguished by any
stylising tendencies such as enable us to classify the other fabrics of
Southern Italy and assign them to particular districts, and on the
other hand bear the same relation to the later R.F. vases of Athens as
do those of the Eastern Mediterranean, it is evident either that all
these fabrics were imported from Athens or that Athenian artists had
been driven to settle in these respective regions. And since it is
exceedingly unlikely that the exportation of pottery from Athens can
have gone on to any extent in the fourth century, it seems, on the
whole, most probable that the latter is the true version.

We may, then, establish a class of vases intermediate between the R.F.
fabrics proper and the local Italian fabrics, which represents the
manner in which Athenian artists carried on their traditions under new
circumstances, and serves to explain how the new Italian schools came
into being.[1453]

These vases are often characterised by a refinement of drawing and
simplicity of conception which recall the earlier R.F. period, and in
such cases accessory colours, elaborate draperies, and the filling-in
of the field with miscellaneous objects are studiously avoided. Even
the decorative patterns show considerable restraint. It is probable
that some of these belong to the latter part of the fifth century, even
if they are not actually imported from Athens. But there are others of
a distinctly florid kind, in which we may trace the influence of
Meidias and his school. The compositions are crowded with figures,
often placed at different levels (without indication of ground-lines),
and there is a general tendency to elaborate decoration, both by means
of white pigment and by richly embroidered draperies. As examples may
be cited two fine kraters in the British Museum, one with a scene from
the lesser Mysteries at Agra (F 68), another with Thetis and the
Nereids bearing the arms of Achilles (F 69). The bell-shaped krater is
by far the most favourite form, although practically a new one in Greek
ceramics; contrary to the usual rule, the reverse often has a definite
subject, in which accessories are used, although the tendency had begun
some time before the end of the fifth century to neglect the decoration
of the reverse in kraters and other large vases.

In its new home in Southern Italy this branch of Greek art had lighted
on a very favourable soil. The great colonies such as Tarentum, Capua,
Cumae, and Poseidonia, founded almost in the dawn of Greek history,
were not only as completely Hellenic as Athens and Corinth, but in
luxury and splendour even surpassed them at this period. Hence, art
flourished in such towns far more readily than in the distant and
comparatively barbarous regions of South Russia and North Africa. In
the character of their productions we shall see the nature and
condition of the inhabitants of Southern Italy reflected. The chief aim
is splendour and general effect; and both the size and colouring of the
vases indicate to some extent the luxury and magnificence in which the
people lived.

It must not, however, be supposed that vase-painting was a new art
introduced to this region by Athenians in the earlier part of the
fourth century. In another chapter we shall speak of the early attempts
at imitation of Greek vases on the part of the semi-barbarian natives
of the peninsula, and reminiscences of these early attempts crop up
from time to time under circumstances of greater development, as will
be seen. Moreover, a constant stream of importations from Athens (small
indeed as compared with that to Etruria, but still steady) had been
finding its way to the Greek colonies of Southern Italy and Sicily;
special fabrics were made for export to Nola, Gela, and other places;
and thus the local artists had all along been undergoing an unconscious
training which enabled them to take up the industry at the point where
the Athenian artists left off.[1454]

The local fabrics of Southern Italy fall into three main classes,
corresponding to the geographical divisions of Apulia, Lucania, and
Campania, which three, with some modifications, include all that come
under discussion in the present section. Before, however, entering upon
the question of the criteria on which this classification is based, a
few general considerations may be touched upon by way of preface.

The study of South Italy fabrics is to some extent a new one. At the
beginning of the last century, when scarcely any vases had been found
outside Italy, the majority of both public and private collections
consisted of vases of this period. Of those now exhibited in the Fourth
Vase Room of the British Museum, at least one-fifth are from the
collections of Sir William Hamilton, Charles Towneley, and Richard
Payne Knight; and in such publications as those of D'Hancarville,
Tischbein, Inghirami, and Millin, a great majority of the plates are
devoted to them. Hence their importance was much over-estimated; but,
on the other hand, no attention was paid to questions of style or
provenance, and they were only regarded as pretty pictures.
Subsequently to the discoveries at Vulci, and the gradual growth of the
scientific study of vase-painting, the later vases suffered greatly
from neglect, as yielding less interest than the early fabrics and the
products of the best Athenian artists, and even at the present day it
is rare to find them made the subject of serious study. The only
writer, in fact, who has attempted in recent years to apply to them the
critical methods of modern archaeology is Signor G. Patroni of the
Naples Museum, who has availed himself of the opportunities afforded by
the extensive series under his care.[1455]

The vases from Southern Italy, which from their style may be regarded
as undoubtedly local non-Attic fabrics, are all distinguished by
certain common features. In all there is seen a perpetual striving
after effect rather than beauty, manifested in the size and splendid
appearance of the earlier Apulian products, in the largeness of style
and bold drawing of Lucanian artists, especially the school of Paestum,
and in the gaudy colouring of the Campanian vases. The later Apulian
wares are chiefly remarkable for varied and exaggerated shapes.

Common to all vases alike is the fondness for ornamental patterns, such
as the egg-pattern, wave-pattern, maeander, palmettes, and wreaths of
laurel, myrtle, or ivy; though even these are guided by certain rules,
much as on the black-figured vases. On the large bell-shaped kraters
the decoration almost invariably consists of a laurel-wreath round the
lip, maeander below the designs, and palmette patterns under the
handles; and every shape of vase has its characteristic decoration. The
Campanian vases show the least tendency to formal ornament, and the
Lucanian run to the opposite extreme. The column-handled kraters are
almost alone in retaining the archaic scheme of decoration in panels
with borders of ornament, to which they adhere throughout the R.F.
period; but the panels are occasionally employed for hydriae or
oinochoae. In most cases, however, the luxuriant palmette patterns
under the handles form an adequate frame for the design with the
maeander band below. A female head frequently occurs as a decorative
motive, especially in the Apulian vases; either forming the main
decoration, or placed under the handles, or adorning the neck,
encircled with foliage. So too the figure of Eros is employed on the
later Apulian vases purely as a decorative motive.

The shapes of the vases present a very great variety, as compared with
the Athenian fabrics.[1456] The bell-shaped krater enjoyed a short
vogue, and is only found in the earlier examples; but besides the
column-handled type already mentioned, the calyx-krater (_vaso a
calice_) and the volute-handled (_a rotelle_) form occur from time to
time. Among the early Apulian vases a variety of the latter, with
medallions (_mascherone_) in place of the volutes, frequently occurs;
these are often of gigantic size, decorated with several rows of
figures, and nearly all the finest existing specimens are of this form.
It is also the usual type for the sepulchral vases (see below). The
medallions are ornamented with Gorgons’ masks and other devices,
coloured on a white slip. A peculiar local variety of the krater, with
four handles, is found in Lucania only (see p. 172).

Other vases for holding liquids are the situla, lebes, amphora, and
hydria, forms which are more or less familiar. The amphora is slender,
with more or less elliptical body; in Campania it is small and
squat-shouldered, the body almost cylindrical, but in Apulia it is
usually very tall and elegant (cf. Plate XLV.). An occasional variant
has a cylindrical flat-topped body, with elaborate handles in the form
of scrolls; the so-called _pelike_ is a more common type, but somewhat
inelegant. The hydria is usually a degenerate version of the R.F.
_kalpis_, but at Paestum the Attic type still obtains. A new form is
that known as the _lekane_, a jar for holding sweetmeats; it has
vertical handles and a cover of elaborate form, often surmounted by a
small vase. Of similar type is the so-called _lepaste_, a circular
covered dish on a high stem.

Among the smaller vases may be mentioned the oinochoë, of which there
are one or two varieties, notably the graceful _prochoos_, with its
high handle and foot, and the equally ungraceful _epichysis_, with its
long beak-like mouth and pyxis-shaped body; both of these are confined
to Apulia. The lekythos retains the bulbous body and low foot of the
later R.F. period; the askos in various forms is fairly common. Two new
varieties are a sort of alabastron without a handle but with flat base,
and a jar with a handle over the mouth. Of drinking-cups the kantharos
and rhyton are popular among the later Apulian wares; the kotyle is
rare, and the kylix has almost entirely disappeared, its place being
taken by a gigantic circular dish, elaborately decorated inside and
out. These are obviously designed with a view to general effect, and
seem to have been intended for hanging up against a wall.

In regard to the technique the general method is that of the later R.F.
vases; but in the majority all idea of simplicity and refinement is
lost, and the tendency to exaggeration and showiness is manifested both
in drawing and colouring. Throughout there is a fondness for large
masses of white, and this pigment is used not only for the flesh of
women and of Eros, but for architectural details and other objects,
such as temples, shrines, and lavers. Yellow is largely employed for
details, especially for features or hair, and for picking out the
ornamental patterns; purple, too, is not uncommon. Attempts at shading
are occasionally found.[1457] Accessory colours are, however, seldom
found on the reverses of the vases, which are always drawn and painted
with the greatest carelessness.

The drawing is entirely free, and in fact errs on the other side,
becoming careless and faulty; the forms are soft, and the male figures
often effeminate. An extreme facility of hand has indeed proved the
ruin of the vase-painter. The love of the far-fetched betrays itself in
variety of posture and elaborate foreshortening; and in the richly
embroidered draperies and studied settings of some scenes the influence
of the theatre is obviously to be traced. Frequent attempts are made at
perspective, especially in buildings of which the insides are shown,
but the attempts are seldom successful. As a rule the artist is content
to indicate figures in the background by placing them on a higher
level, or only showing the upper half of the figure. On many vases with
mythological subjects, especially those of Apulia, a row of deities is
thus represented, as if seated on the ?e????e??? of the stage.
Landscape is represented by rocks, stones, and flowers scattered about,
trees and buildings; but in most cases the painter prefers the old
system of merely giving a clue to the scene, representing the palaestra
by jumping-weights or oil-flasks suspended, women’s apartments by
sashes, toilet-boxes, or small windows, and so on.

The pictorial effect of the scenes on many vases naturally gives rise
to the question to what extent the artists were indebted to the great
painters of the fifth and fourth centuries. In some cases the paintings
seem to be more naturally adapted for large canvases than for the
limited surface of a vase; but more than this, in others the subjects
actually lead our thoughts directly back to the works of great masters
of which we have record. The influence of Polygnotos and his school has
indeed died out, but the emotional tendencies of the fourth-century
painters and their fondness for new and difficult subjects found a
ready echo in the conceptions of the Apulian vase-painters. It may
suffice to quote a few instances from the British Museum collection.
Thus on one vase (F 479) we find a representation of the infant
Herakles strangling the snakes, a theme selected by the great Zeuxis,
and also to be seen in one of the paintings from the house of the
Vettii at Pompeii. Or, again, the famous sacrifice of Iphigeneia and
the death of Hippolytos, subjects which employed the brushes of
Timanthes and Antiphilos respectively, are depicted in a truly
pictorial manner on two kraters (F 160, F 279). In each case we are
able to note a correspondence with the description of the pictures
given by Pliny; in the last-named, also, with a picture described by
Philostratos. Were more known of ancient pictures, it is possible that
other examples would be readily found; but that some such influence was
exerted can hardly be questioned.

Again, in the later vases with opaque designs on black grounds (see p.
488), most of which are merely decorated with wreaths, festoons, or
masks, we are at once reminded of the Pompeian wall-paintings, or
rather of their predecessors in the Hellenistic Age, since the vases
must be earlier than most of the pictures of Pompeii. There is a vase
of late date in the British Museum (F 542) which, with its elaborate
treatment of light and shade effects and its border of arabesques, not
only in its subject (a young shepherd and his dog), but also in method,
suggests a close connection with the Pompeian frescoes.[1458]

Another influence at work on the vases of the period besides that of
the great painters was that of the stage, in which both tragedy and
comedy play their part. The influence of tragedy as represented on the
Greek stage is seen not only in the choice of subjects, but in the
composition of the scenes and the costumes of the figures. This is
especially the case with the large Apulian vases with mythological
subjects. The architectural arrangements, with a temple, altar, or
statue in the centre, the embroidered draperies and gorgeous tiaras
worn by the principal personages, and the abundance of dramatic or even
passionate action, can only be due to the influence of the stage. But
it is only to Euripides that we can ascribe this influence. There
appears to have been a great revival of his plays towards the end of
the fourth century, especially in Magna Graecia, and the extent of the
effect of this revival on the vase-paintings has been discussed by
several writers. The tendency of the age to passion and pathos, seen in
the Pergamene sculptures and other great works of art, as well as in
the paintings of a Parrhasios or a Timanthes, would naturally find an
echo in the subjects treated of by Euripides. Of the existing dramas,
we find scenes drawn more or less directly from the _Hecuba_, the
_Hercules Furens_, the _Hippolytos_, the two _Iphigeneias_, the
_Medeia_, and the _Phoenissae_. Many others can be traced to the lost
dramas, as for instance (to quote only from examples in the British
Museum) the _Alkmena_, the _Oineus_, the _Antigone_, the _Andromeda_,
the _Oinomaos_, and the _Lykourgos_.[1459]

It has been observed that on many vases of this period on which
mythological subjects are represented, although the theme is
essentially tragic, yet the treatment has a somewhat grotesque, not to
say burlesque effect. A notable instance is the well-known vase of
Assteas in Madrid, with Herakles destroying his children (Fig. 107).
This quasi-comic element, which appears to be quite unintentional, is
often accompanied by considerable largeness of scale, exemplified in
the size of the figures, the expression of the features, and the
drawing generally. It may be that a certain element of exaggeration
attended the revival of tragedy in Southern Italy,[1460] caused by
unsuccessful attempts to retain the lofty manner and large style of the
old productions. Hence too, perhaps, the fondness for burlesques of
tragedies among the comic writers of the period, reflected in another
class of vases.

In the vases with comic subjects it is not necessary to have recourse
to the Attic Comedy, New, Middle, or Old, to account for their
introduction; an explanation lies nearer at hand. It is true that the
costumes worn by the actors are closely related to those of the Old
Comedy,[1461] and that one or two subjects may possibly be traced to
the _Frogs_ of Aristophanes (see Chapter XV.). But it is not likely
that these plays were ever revived in Southern Italy, as were those of
Euripides. They were essentially topical, and their political and
social satire would have been lost on a later generation. On the other
hand, we know that a kind of farce, known as the f??a? was especially
popular with the people of Tarentum and other towns of Southern Italy
in the fourth century, either dealing with subjects of daily life or
burlesquing mythology and heroic legends. It was during the performance
of one of these in the theatre at Tarentum that the spectators saw the
Roman fleets entering their harbour in 302 B.C.[1462] The best-known
writer of _phlyakes_ was Rhinthon, whose _Amphitruo_ was the original
of Plautus’ play of that name; a scene from this may be portrayed in a
vase in the Museo Gregoriano at Rome.[1463] His plays, to judge from
the titles, were mainly burlesques; but all literary remains have
perished, and we can only form an idea of them from the vases.

In many of these scenes the actual stage is represented; in others we
have merely the figure of a comic actor, sometimes in a grotesque
attitude. The figures almost invariably wear masks and padded stomachs,
their dress consisting of a close-fitting leather garment with sleeves
and tight trousers, over which is a short loose tunic (see Fig. 105);
on their feet are the traditional _socci_ or low shoes of comedy, and
there is one instance of an actor wearing gloves. The subjects of these
vases have been dealt with elsewhere,[1464] and need not be
recapitulated here; the example given in Fig. 105, a burlesque of
Herakles and Auge,[1465] may serve as typical. They have a peculiar
style of their own, and can hardly be classed with any of the known
fabrics, though found all over Southern Italy. One is signed by the
painter Assteas of Paestum, but we look in vain for evidence of his
usual style thereon. They may all be regarded as belonging to the
fourth century.

[Illustration:

  From _Jahrbuch_, i.
  FIG. 105. BURLESQUE SCENE: HERAKLES AND AUGE.
]

Turning to the subjects in general on these vases, we note the
systematic supplanting of the old heroic myths by new subjects of a
dramatic and emotional nature. As in the case of the gods Zeus and
Athena are replaced by Apollo, Aphrodite, and Dionysos, so instead of
the labours of Herakles and Theseus we find themes drawn from the
stories of Troy and Thebes, or the legends of Pelops, Hippolytos,
Pentheus, and Lykourgos. The taking of Troy in particular is a popular
subject on the large vases, as are single episodes, such as Ajax
seizing Kassandra. Among entirely new subjects, introduced from the
tragedies, are those relating to Alkmena, Pelops, Oedipus, and the
later Theban heroes.

Cosmogonic myths such as the Gigantomachia and the Birth of Athena
entirely disappear, as do many of the myths connected with the gods; on
the other hand, such subjects as the contest of Apollo and Marsyas, the
Judgment of Paris, Triptolemos, or Europa and the bull, retain their
popularity. Herakles is conveyed to Olympos by Nike instead of Athena;
but his labours and combats are seldom represented. The typically Attic
subjects, Theseus, Eos and Kephalos, and the Birth of Erichthonios,
disappear as might have been expected, as does the wrestling of Peleus
and Thetis. Combats of Greeks with Centaurs and Amazons are favourite
subjects, but often little more than decorative.

Dionysiac scenes are very frequent, but usually in the form of groups
of figures without any particular meaning; Aphrodite, and even Apollo,
similarly occur in the midst of Nymphs and attendants, without special
characterising of the figures. A peculiar feature of the period is the
almost universal presence of Eros. Whether the scene be mythological,
Dionysiac, or from daily life, he is an almost invariable participant,
and on the later Apulian vases frequently occurs as a single decorative
figure.

Scenes from daily life are, if anything, more common than mythological
subjects. Banquet-scenes and revels are very popular, and the kottabos
is sometimes introduced (see Chapter XV.). A departing warrior is
sometimes represented on Lucanian and Campanian vases (see Fig. 108 and
Plate XLIV.), but chariot and battle scenes are comparatively rare.
Among the Apulian vases occur a large class of subjects formerly
characterised on insufficient grounds as “toilet scenes” of Aphrodite
or Helen. Many no doubt actually represent scenes from women’s daily
life; but the commonest type is that of a seated woman and a standing
youth exchanging presents of fruit, mirrors, sashes, or toilet-boxes.
The presence of Eros in most cases suggests scenes of courting and the
offerings of lovers; but as a rule they are purely fanciful, like the
designs on Dresden and Sèvres china.

Athletic scenes, in which a race or contest, is going on, are
practically non-existent; but groups of athletes, or rather of
_ephebi_, usually wrapped in mantles and conversing together, furnish
the stock decoration of the reverse of the kraters and other
double-sided vases, a practice already begun in the Athenian R.F.
vases, and now become invariable.

Two classes of subjects to which allusion has not yet been made, and
which are almost confined to the large Apulian vases, have an important
bearing on the purpose for which these vases were made—namely, for use
at funerals. The first class includes scenes from the under-world, and
in this series are some of the most magnificent of existing vases (see
Plate LII.). The subjects and the manner of their representation have
been fully discussed elsewhere (Chapter XIII.); they are treated in the
same theatrical style as the mythological scenes already discussed.

The second class is confined to scenes representing offerings at the
tombs of the departed, which may take two forms. In the simpler, which
is characteristic of Lucania and Campania, and especially of the hydria
form, the tomb is a stele, like those of the Athenian lekythi, at which
the relatives of the deceased meet to mourn or make offerings (Fig.
20). The “type” is that of Orestes and Electra at the tomb of
Agamemnon, but only in one or two cases is it possible to suggest this
interpretation. On the Apulian vases, almost exclusively on the large
kraters and amphorae, but sometimes also on the hydriae, a more
elaborate treatment of the subject is employed. The centre of the scene
is occupied by an Ionic distyle building representing a ????? or shrine
devoted to the worship of an ancestor or family “hero.” In the entrance
of this building (which is painted white to denote marble) stands or
sits the figure of a young man or a woman holding some attribute—a cup
or piece of armour—or standing by a horse. These figures are usually
painted white throughout like the building, which seems to imply that a
statue or relief is represented rather than an actual human
figure.[1466] On either side of the shrine figures are represented
bringing libations. Sometimes the actual tomb of the deceased is
represented with a plant growing in it; or, again, a lady is
represented at her toilet with her maid, as in the Athenian sepulchral
reliefs (Fig. 106). Each person is represented with his appropriate
costume or attributes—the warrior with horse or armour, the hunter with
dog, the lady with articles of toilet.

[Illustration: FIG. 106. APULIAN VASE WITH SEPULCHRAL SCENE (BRITISH
MUSEUM).]

In spite of the absence of “banquet” or “greeting” scenes, the
parallelism with the Attic reliefs is very marked, and the sepulchral
character of these vases is indubitable. It is, further, natural to
suppose that there is some reference to the worship of a ???? or
deceased ancestor, such as is known to have been a universal custom
among the Greeks.[1467] Reliefs have been found at Tarentum with
subjects which obviously have this reference. Apart from these two
classes, however, the majority of the vases of Southern Italy seem to
have been made originally for ornamental purposes, such as the
decoration of a house, as is implied by the distinction in the artistic
merit of the two sides.

Artists’ signatures in this period are exceedingly rare; only three, in
fact, are known. Of these one may be briefly dismissed—Lasimos,[1468]
who signed a fine Apulian vase in the Louvre, with sepulchral and other
scenes; his style is hardly distinctive enough to admit of identifying
any others as his work. But in the other two names, those of =Assteas=
and =Python=, we find more interest. Five vases exist with the
signature of Assteas, and one with that of Python, and it is
interesting to note that they both use the form ???a?e (see Chapter
XVII.). The list is as follows:

ASSTEAS. (1) Krater from Paestum in Madrid. Reinach, i. 168 =
         Baumeister, i. p. 665, fig. 732 = Fig. 107. Herakles
         destroying his children.

       (2) Krater from Paestum in Naples (3412). _Wiener Vorl._ B. 2.
         Phrixos and Helle.

       (3) Krater from S. Agata dei Goti in Naples (3226). Millingen,
         _Anc. Uned. Mon._ i. 27. Kadmos slaying the dragon.

       (4) Krater from S. Agata dei Goti in Berlin (3044). _Wiener
         Vorl._ B. 3, 1. Scene from farce (parody of Prokrustes?).

       (5) Lekythos from Paestum in Naples (2873). Millin-Reinach, i.
         pl. 3. The garden of the Hesperides.

PYTHON. Krater from S. Agata dei Goti in the British Museum (F 149).
         _J.H.S._ xi. pl. 6. Alkmena on the funeral pyre.

The characteristics of Assteas’ work are very marked, and, curiously
enough, Python’s differs little from it. Both are essentially pictorial
artists, trained in Greek traditions, and inheriting from Attic
painters like Meidias the love of elaborate and minutely rendered
draperies and picturesque grouping of figures at different levels. In
the latter detail we also seem to see signs of the influence of
Polygnotos.

There are many other vases in our museums which present the same
features of style and treatment as these.[1469] Besides those already
mentioned, the fondness for half-figures in the background, the large
heads, pronounced features, and heavy masses of hair in the figures on
these vases connect them unmistakably with the school represented by
the two artists. It is not the style of Lucania or of Campania, still
less that of Apulia; and yet it is clearly an Italian fabric. Some
previous writers have maintained that Assteas came from (or was
resident at) Tarentum, arguing thus partly on epigraphical grounds,
partly on the ground of his employment of scenes from the farces,[1470]
which, as we have seen, were popular in that city. But having regard to
the fact that three out of five of Assteas’ vases were found at
Paestum, and that he combines certain characteristics of Lucanian and
Campanian fabrics, we may fairly assume that he (and therefore also
Python) resided in that city, which lay on the border of the two
districts.

We are thus enabled to establish a =style of Paestum= distinct from the
other Italian fabrics—a conclusion at which the present writer and
Signor Patroni arrived independently some years back. The latter has
pointed out that several small details also point to that city—such as
the gaily plumed helmet worn by Herakles on the Madrid vase, which
resembles those worn by local warriors on paintings found in that
city.[1471] And in the Naples Museum there are several other vases in
the style of Assteas from Paestum.[1472] Signor Patroni dates Assteas
about 350–320 B.C., Python a little later.

[Illustration:

  From _Baumeister_.
  FIG. 107. VASE BY ASSTEAS IN MADRID: HERAKLES DESTROYING HIS CHILDREN.
]

The Madrid vase and the Python krater are in their way masterpieces,
and form almost the finest examples we possess of South Italian
vase-painting. Both are extraordinarily rich in colouring as well as in
detail. The former (Fig. 107) represents, as has been said, Herakles
destroying his children the subject being treated in a manner which to
us appears almost grotesque, not to say comic. But it is probable that
this is due partly to the element of exaggeration which has been
ascribed to the revival of tragedy (see p. 472). The whole conception
is obviously theatrical, with the setting of Herakles and his child,
the principal figures, against a background formed, after theatrical
models, by the front of the palace, through openings in which appear
the horrified faces of Alkmena and Iolaos, and that of Mania, the
goddess of madness. Herakles has already set fire to a confused pile of
household furniture—tables, chairs, and wool-baskets—and a child clings
to him in agony, while Megara tears her dishevelled hair; but their
pleadings have no effect. In the Python krater the action is less
violent and theatrical, but there is the same gaudiness of colouring
and richness of embroidered costume. Alkmena is seated on the pyre, to
which Amphitryon and Antenor are about to set light, and raises her
hand in supplication to Zeus, whose bust is seen above. In answer to
her prayer the Hyades or rain-nymphs pour down water from their
pitchers to extinguish the flames. It should be noted that in this
painting we have several successive stages of time combined in one (cf.
Vol. II. p. 10); the pyre is not yet lighted, but the water is already
descending to extinguish it.

We now proceed to describe in detail the characteristics of the three
principal fabrics, beginning with that of =Lucania=, as the earliest in
character, if not necessarily in point of time. Lucanian vases stand
nearer to the latest Attic fabrics than do those of the other
districts, and do not present the same local peculiarities; nor do they
sink like the others into a state of decadence and barbarism, but are
very conservative in their style.

We note in them a much greater unity of style than in the vases of
Campania, and everything points to one centre of fabrication. This is
most probably Anzi, where the largest number have been found.
Information as to provenance is unfortunately often vague, but few
other places are given as sources (see p. 83), almost the only other
names being those of Pisticci and Pomarico. But the number of vases
that it is possible to attribute to Lucania is not large in any case.

The designs are usually somewhat severe and restrained, and
characterised by a certain stiffness of drawing and largeness of scale.
The heads of figures are abnormally large, with great staring eyes and
masses of hair rendered without detail. The draperies are comparatively
free from ornamentation, only broad black borders and patterns of small
dots being admitted. The clay is of a rich red colour, but accessory
colours are exceedingly rare. Hence they present a great contrast to
the Apulian and Campanian, with their masses of white and generally
gaudy appearance. Another peculiarity is that fillets in the hair are
rendered simply by leaving a narrow band across the head in the colour
of the clay. The figures often stand in the air without the usual
dotted ground-lines, but sometimes the ground is represented by a heap
of loose stones. A favourite device is that of a half-shield seen in
the upper part of the scene, as a sort of indication of locality or
action.[1473] Fig. 108 gives a typical example of Lucanian
vase-painting.

Among the favourite shapes are the bell-shaped krater and the amphora,
also the hydria and column-handled krater. The hydria is generally
employed, as in Campania, for sepulchral subjects. The vases are mostly
of large size, whence a corresponding largeness of the figures; whereas
Campanian vases are generally small, and make up for the absence of
imposing figures by their colouring. An entirely new shape, peculiar to
this style, is the four-handled krater, to which the name of _nestoris_
has been somewhat absurdly given[1474]; it is undoubtedly a local form,
being found in the indigenous pottery of the district.[1475] There are
two varieties, one with a high neck, the other with sloping shoulder
and no neck. The handles are usually ornamented with discs painted with
rosettes, and the designs are in panels surrounded by ornament,
sometimes on the second variety with a lower frieze of figures.
Generally speaking, secondary ornamentation is largely employed on
these vases, especially on the last-named shape. The palmette patterns
under the handles are usually very luxuriant.

[Illustration: FIG. 108. DEPARTURE OF WARRIOR, FROM A LUCANIAN KRATER
(BRITISH MUSEUM).]

The vases of =Campania= present in many ways a striking contrast to
those of Lucania. Their chief characteristic is, as has been noted,
love of picturesque effect and variety of colour, even to the extent of
introducing attempts at shading (see above, p. 471). The vases are
mostly small, and none of the large kraters or amphorae belong to this
class. The favourite shapes are the hydria, lekythos with bulbous body,
and amphora; the latter is clearly an imitation of the Attic “Nolan”
amphorae, which were so largely imported into the district, but the
body is usually more symmetrical. The clay is usually of a buff or dull
yellow ochre tone, and red and yellow washes are frequently used, as
well as large masses of white; these tints are laid on very carelessly,
and the white is of a kind that is apt to flake off and disappear.
Yellow, purple, and white are largely used as accessories, and the
drawing has a tendency to become very careless. The lines of the ground
are indicated by occasional strokes of white, or by rocks strewn with
flowers. Ornamental patterns are not so popular as in Lucania; the
favourite is the wave, and the palmettes under the handles are thick
and ugly, with angular leaves. Some decorative motives seem to be
derived directly from nature.

The subjects are often interesting and uncommon, introducing recondite
or unusual myths; many of the vases with comic scenes appear to belong
to this class, and one in the British Museum has an Oscan inscription.
Local peculiarities of costume and armour, which Signor Patroni calls
Osco-Samnite, are often found; for instance, warriors wear a very short
chiton with broad girdle, a helmet with waving crest and tall
side-plumes of Italian type,[1476] and a remarkable breast-plate formed
of three circular plates of metal arranged in a triangle.[1477] These
same peculiarities are found on the wall-paintings at Paestum, and
there are indications that Virgil was familiar with them.[1478]

Signor Patroni, by dint of an exhaustive study of the Naples
collection, has made a tentative classification of Campanian vases
according to fabric; he distinguishes those of Cumae, Saticula (Santa
Agata dei Goti), and Abella; but those of Capua, Nola, and Neapolis
appear to have no distinctive style. The Cumae fabric, for studying
which the _Raccolta Cumana_ in Naples gives exceptional facilities, is
represented by the long, straight-bodied amphorae, the hydriae with
female heads under the handles, and kraters on which the design is
framed by stylised floral patterns or heavy palmettes. Among the
characteristic patterns are the wave, large flowers in profile, and
ground-ornaments generally, such as ivy-leaves, branches, and small
windows. The strong tendency to polychromy seems to be the result of
using the late Attic polychrome vases as models. In the colouring a new
feature is the use of a carmine red, which, according to Patroni, is
only found in the Cumae fabrics.[1479] Mythological subjects are
rare,[1480] sepulchral common, and shrines are found on these alone;
but the majority have scenes from daily life,[1481] banquets, return of
warriors, etc. It is on these that the local costumes are usually found.

The Saticula fabrics are very uniform,[1482] practically all
bell-shaped kraters with red clay; colours are sparingly used, and then
only white; a maeander takes the place of the wave-pattern as a border;
ground-lines are usually indicated. Of subjects Dionysiac have the
preference. The vases of Abella are of late date, chiefly hydriae of
very pale clay with accessory colours; among the typical patterns are
arabesques ending in white daisies. They sometimes show reminiscences
of the Paestum style.[1483]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                              PLATE XLIV

[Illustration:

  SOUTH ITALIAN VASES (BRITISH MUSEUM).
  1, 2, APULIAN VASES; 3, CAMPANIAN.
]

                  ------------------------------------

There are a few peculiar fabrics which we may also attribute to a
Campanian origin, including rude imitations of the B.F. style, chiefly
small amphorae with single figures; imitations of Nolan amphorae,
reproducing both their form and their scheme of decoration[1484]; and
bell-shaped kraters imitating the Attic style, which Signor Patroni has
associated with Saticula. The imitations of Nolan amphorae have a slim
body, twisted handles, and a sharply set-off shoulder forming a right
angle with the neck instead of a graceful curve. As in their
prototypes, the subjects are confined to one or two figures each side.
The lustrous black glaze of the Attic vases is admirably reproduced.
There is also a class of vases with designs painted in opaque red on
the black ground, reproducing the method of the transitional vases
described on p. 393.[1485] They are very rude in character, with
roughly incised details and subjects of a simple kind; the red pigment
appears to have been made from fragments of pounded pottery (_testa
trita_). There is, however, one remarkable exception—a small phiale in
the British Museum,[1486] dating from the third century, with the
subject of a shepherd-boy with his dog. The design is carefully painted
in opaque red and white in the style of the Pompeian wall-paintings,
and the effect of light and shade produced by hatched lines is both
remarkable and unique. A krater found at Civita Castellana
(Falerii),[1487] the paintings on which are in Campanian style, is
unique in having Latin inscriptions over the figures, a group
consisting of Zeus (... SPATER, _Die_]_spater_), Ganymede, Eros
(CVPIDO), and Athena (MENERVA). The subject is conceived rather in the
style of the Etruscan mirrors than that of the painted vases, and is
obviously under local influence. As Falerii was destroyed in 243 B.C.,
a _terminus ante quem_ may be obtained for the date of the vase, as for
others found on this site (see p. 75).

The vases of =Apulia= are not only more numerous, but of more merit and
greater interest than those of the other two classes. In them may be
observed two or three stages of development, beginning with a fifth- or
early fourth-century group of Attic type, consisting of large amphorae
with two friezes of figures.[1488] Both in shape and method of
decoration these form the prototype of the large kraters and amphorae
which comprise the second class; they are distinguished from the latter
by severity of treatment and absence of colour. The second class
includes the large vases with mythological and tragic subjects, the
Under-world vases, and those with sepulchral scenes; they are all
richly decorated from head to foot, with two main rows of figures,
smaller subjects on the neck, and ornamentation over every available
space. The theatrical characteristics of which we have spoken above (p.
472) are best illustrated by some of this series.

The third class includes some large vases, such as the so-called
_pelikae_ and the large phialae, and the smaller forms, the oinochoë
and its varieties, and kanthari, rhyta, and other kinds of
drinking-cups. Some shapes are peculiar to this class. In spite of the
great variety of shape, there is a remarkable poverty of conception in
the subjects, which show a tendency to become purely decorative, and
are mainly confined to the vague “courting” scenes or “toilet” scenes,
or to single figures of Eros and Nike. On the smallest vases the
commonest subject is often that of a female head covered with a cap,
sometimes of a relatively colossal size, and this also occurs,
surrounded by foliage, on the necks of the large vases. The shapes, as
in the case of the _epichysis_ (p. 179), often tend to ugliness and
over-refinement.

The conception of Eros on the later Apulian vases is one of their chief
characteristics (cf. Plate XLIV.). An almost invariable participant in
every scene, his form assumes an androgynous character; his hair is
arranged in feminine fashion, and his person adorned with necklaces,
earrings, and other jewellery. Among other peculiarities we may note
the double line of white or yellow dots for ground-lines; the
characterising of Oriental figures by tiaras and cross-belts; the
general treatment of the hair of women, at first long, thick, and
wig-like, but later gathered up in a cap, from which the ends float out
behind; the thick but effeminate proportions of the men; and the small
heads of the horses.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                               PLATE XLV

                                                     _To face page 486._

[Illustration:

  APULIAN AMPHORA.
  PERSEPHONE IN HADES.
  (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

                  ------------------------------------

There does not seem to be any possibility of distinguishing different
centres of fabric in Apulia. Nor can Tarentum have been a centre of
vase-fabrics, although Lenormant stoutly upheld its claims, as the
chief centre of Greek civilisation in that region. But Tarentum has
been the scene of much excavation, and results do not point to that
conclusion; most of the vases found there are purely Greek. On the
other hand, enormous numbers have been found at Ruvo, and this was
undoubtedly the chief centre, though without a distinguishing style of
its own. Ruvo was famous for its red clay, and remains of furnaces and
potteries have been found there. Other sites where vases have been
found are Bari, Canosa, and Ceglie. At Canosa there was a preference
for the tall amphora with scroll-handles, the large phiale, and the
prochoös,[1489] and purple accessories were largely used here. It is
also interesting to recall that Canosa seems to have been the centre
for the large ornamental vases of terracotta painted in _tempera_ (p.
119).

On some of the column-handled kraters[1490] local costumes appear,
probably representing the Peucetians, and having some affinities with
those of Lucania; the principal features are the tall pointed cap and
short striped chiton worn by both sexes. Another group peculiar to
Apulia is formed by the fish-plates[1491]—a peculiar form of plate,
with low stem, a sinking in the centre, and edge turned over, all being
painted with fish of various kinds (Plate XLIV.). They were no doubt
used for eating fish, the sinking being for the sauce; but they may
also have been hung up as votive offerings in the temple of some marine
deity.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The last efforts of vase-painting on the soil of Magna Graecia date
from the latter half of the third century B.C. By this time
vase-painting had reached a stage of complete decadence, devoid of
style or taste, and rapidly verging on barbarism, as shown in some
specimens, which seem to be the efforts of local craftsmen to copy the
better examples, but with the same want of success as the
Etruscans.[1492]

Another direction which vase-painting took before it finally
disappeared is illustrated by a group of vases mostly found at Egnazia
(Gnathia) in Apulia, which clearly form a final stage in the evolution
of the local fabric just discussed. Originally known from the place
where the majority was found as _vasi di Egnazia_ or Gnathia vases,
they were in the view of Lenormant more probably made at
Tarentum.[1493] But we have seen that there is slight evidence of local
fabric there,[1494] and their connection with the fabrics of Ruvo and
Canosa makes it more likely that they came from that neighbourhood. It
is therefore probable that the old name is the correct one.

The characteristics of this group are: (1) the black varnish with which
the _whole_ vase is covered; (2) the designs painted in opaque
colours—white, purple, and yellow; (3) the tendency to imitate vases of
metal, as seen in the vertically ribbed bodies and other details of
form. The important _rôle_ played by the black varnish is interesting,
as showing the increasing tendency to reduce the painter’s labour to a
minimum, combined with a striving after novelty and the rejuvenation of
the art. The practice, no doubt, arose from the discovery of the
painter that it was easier to paint the figures on the black in opaque
colour than to trace them out in the clay and work round them with the
varnish, especially in the case of the elaborate foliage patterns which
played so important a part in Apulian vases.

The subjects are usually confined to the shoulder or neck, at least of
the larger vases; but figures are comparatively rare. One krater in the
British Museum (F 543) which belongs to the comic series is a notable
exception; and there is a pleasing subject on a skyphos in the
Louvre[1495]—a cock and goose confronted, and greeting one another with
the respective salutations, “Ah, the goose!” “Oh, the cock!” But in the
majority of cases the only designs are female heads, Erotes (Fig. 118),
birds, comic and tragic masks suspended from wreaths, and simple
foliage patterns. The reverse of the two-sided vases is often
undecorated.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 109. HYDRIA WITH OPAQUE PAINTING ON BLACK GROUND, FROM CURIUM
  (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

It is interesting to note that specimens of this ware are sometimes
found on Greek sites, such as Athens, Myrina in Asia Minor, Melos, and
Cyprus. At Curium in the latter island a fine hydria in this style,
with figures on the shoulder (Fig. 109), was found in 1895.[1496]
Whether these were imported from Italy or made elsewhere is quite
uncertain.[1497]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 110. PHIALE WITH LATIN INSCRIPTION: “THE CUP OF AEQUITIA”
  (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

Another interesting but much smaller class which belongs to the latter
half of the third century is formed by a group of vases, mostly small
phialae, which are distinguished by bearing painted Latin
inscriptions.[1498] Some also have figures (Eros, a female head, etc.),
which are treated in the same manner as the Gnatia vases. It is
probable that Rome was the place of origin of this class, in spite of
the fact that most of them were found in Etruria.[1499] But the Latin
language at that time was more at home in Campania than anywhere else
outside Rome. The inscriptions take the form: AECETIAI POCOLOM,
_Aequitiae poculum_ (B.M. F 604 = Fig. 110); IVNONENES POCOLOM,
_Junonis poculum_; and so on,—Saturn, Mercury, and other Roman deities
being included in the list. Reasons have been given for dating this
series in the First Punic War, 260–240 B.C.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Formerly it was universally supposed that the art of vase-painting was
brought to an end in 186 B.C. by the action of the Roman Senate when
they issued their edict against Bacchanalian ceremonies, which
undoubtedly affected Southern Italy. But this was only a natural view
to be taken by writers who associated the painted vases with the
Eleusinian mysteries and similar ideas; on other grounds it is hardly
tenable. Especially in regard to the general putting back of the
chronology of the art, it is impossible to suppose that painted vases
with mythological subjects were still made in the second century. The
character of the mid-third-century vases just described is sufficient
to indicate that they represent the last stage to which Greek painting
could ever have reached.

                § 3. FIGURE-VASES AND VASES WITH RELIEFS

We propose to conclude this sketch of the history of Greek
vase-painting with a few words on a principle which, while always
present in Greek pottery, yet at all times lay in the background, until
the latest stages of the art, when it entered on a phase of increased
popularity. This is the principle of combining the ceramic with the
plastic art—in other words, the manufacture of vases in the form of
human or animal figures or heads.

It has already been noted, in discussing the primitive pottery of Troy
(p. 257), that the idea of associating the vase form and the human form
is a very old one. At Troy it is of course seen in its most rudimentary
stage, when correct modelling was a thing quite beyond the potter’s
scope, and he could only roughly indicate features and limbs on the
surface of the vase, which thus always remained a vase, and the figure
idea never gained, as in later times, the predominance. In the
Mycenaean period the advance in modelling was great, but only reached a
high level in Crete. It is only since the discoveries at Knossos that
we have been able to account for the astounding group of porcelain
_rhyta_ from the Enkomi tombs in Cyprus (see Plate X., fig. 4),[1500]
which at first sight seem to have been made by a sixth-century artist,
so admirable and lifelike are they. Although the rams’ heads bear the
palm, the female heads are, for the period, a _tour de force_, so
advanced in type that it would be pardonable to argue—apart from the
circumstances of their discovery—that they must belong to a later stage
of art.

Apart from these, however, the principle did not find its way into
Greece before the seventh century B.C., and then its origin is
indubitably Oriental. It is best exemplified by the discoveries in
Rhodes, especially at Kameiros,[1501] where vases of porcelain and
terracotta are found modelled in the form of helmeted heads or heads of
animals (see Plate XLVI., fig. 1, and p. 127). The type adopted is that
of the aryballos (p. 197); it was no doubt a comparatively easy matter
to model its spherical body into the form required, applying paint
where necessary to bring out the details as on the vases. In the
Western Mediterranean the _alabastron_ form seems to have been more
popular.[1502] It is often adopted for the Canopic vases of Etruria
(see Chapter XVIII.). Many of these are unpainted, or rather are
covered with a white slip and then painted in _tempera_ like the
ordinary terracotta figures; they are, in fact, figurines in essence,
vases by accident; whereas in the first-named group the vase idea
retains the predominance. But it is almost impossible to draw the line.
A fine early instance of imitation of metal in early Greek pottery is
the British Museum jug from Aegina (A 457) terminating in the head of a
Gryphon.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                              PLATE XLVI

[Illustration:

  GREEK VASES MODELLED IN VARIOUS FORMS (BRITISH MUSEUM).
  1, 6, SIXTH CENTURY; 2, 4, 5, FIFTH CENTURY; 3, FOURTH CENTURY.
]

                  ------------------------------------

During the sixth century painted figurine vases are rare, though there
are not wanting various examples of the class just described, which
belong to this period; but at all events hardly any examples can be
traced to Athenian manufacture during the age of B.F. vase-painting.
Towards the end of the century, however, the fashion was reintroduced
by the potter Charinos, who belongs to the transitional period (about
525–500 B.C.). A vase signed by him, which was found at Corneto, is in
the form of a female head surmounted by a _kalathos_.[1503] It was made
in a mould like the terracotta figures, but the painted decoration,
which is remarkably elaborate and minute, is entirely B.F. in
character. The patterns on the head-dress include maeander, stars,
ivy-leaves, lozenge and net patterns, and a minute frieze of animals,
painted in black on the clay ground. A similar vase, but later in date,
is in the Berlin Museum[1504]; in this example we may note the
introduction of R.F. ornamentation, in the palmettes and diapering
round the top.

These two stand at the head of a series of similar vases extending
throughout the succeeding periods down to the end of the age of painted
vases. They compare for style with the heads of the female statues
found on the Acropolis, which belong to the same period. Two other
potters, Kaliades and Prokles, made similar vases.[1505]

The fashion started by Charinos continued throughout the fifth century,
but the plastic conception tended to become subordinate to the ceramic,
and it became more and more customary to decorate the non-plastic
portions in the manner of the vases. Of this development the most
noteworthy example is the beautiful rhyton in the British Museum in the
form of a Sphinx (E 788), the upper or vase part of which is ornamented
with the subject of Kekrops and Erichthonios. The body of the Sphinx is
covered with a fine white slip, and the details are picked out with red
and gilding. This vase dates from about the middle of the century.
There also exist many examples of rhyta or kanthari, formed of a head
or two heads back to back, usually a Maenad and a Seilenos.[1506]
Another favourite type is that of a jug in the form of a negro’s or
Aethiopian’s head[1507]; and there are also rhyta which terminate in
the head of a lion, mule, or other animal finely modelled (Plate XLVI.,
figs. 2, 5).

Towards the end of the fifth century there is a reversion to the purely
plastic figure-vase, usually in the form of a lekythos with spherical
body, to the front of which the figure is attached (Plate XLVI., fig.
4). The vase is usually covered with black glaze, and the figure with a
white slip like the terracottas, with polychrome colouring. Examples of
this class are the series of lekythi representing Aphrodite Anadyomene
in a scallop-shell, of which there are examples at Athens and
Petersburg,[1508] and the fine vase in the British Museum (E 716) with
the bust of Athena Parthenos. A series of smaller lekythi, of which the
British Museum possesses examples (G 2–7), represents Eros on a
dolphin, the young Dionysos in a sort of canopy, Europa on the bull, a
boy with a dog, and other subjects; the technique is similar to that of
the larger specimens, with pink and green colouring. They form charming
little objects, and are often well executed.[1509]

In Southern Italy many of these types are continued, the most popular
being that of the rhyton ending in an animal’s head (p. 193), of which
many examples have been found in Apulia. They usually have some simple
design painted on the upper part, such as a figure of Eros. There are
also numerous examples of vases in the form of animals or human figures
(Plate XLVI., fig. 3), some of which are in black glazed ware with
patterns in white like the vases of Egnazia, others being covered with
white slip like the terracottas. With the decay of painted decoration
the plastic element gradually predominates more and more, until the
vase form becomes, so to speak, purely accidental. Thus in the third
century the fabrics of Canosa, of which we have spoken in a previous
chapter (p. 118), entirely hold the field, and the vases pass out of
the sphere of the history of vase-painting.

In all or nearly all of the vases just described we observe the same
principle at work—namely, the tendency to imitate metal in terracotta.
It is one that is constantly recurring throughout the whole history of
Greek ceramics, with more or less persistency and prominence.
Sometimes, as in the Melian, Proto-Attic, and other fabrics, the
imitation is limited to the form of the handles, which is, strictly
speaking, inappropriate in terracotta, though frequently found in early
bronze vessels.[1510] It is seldom found in Ionia, but in Western
Greece there are many examples during the seventh and sixth centuries,
as in some of the Proto-Corinthian and early Corinthian wares,[1511]
This is doubtless in a large measure due to the influence of the great
centres of metal-work at that time, Corinth and Chalkis. We are not,
therefore, surprised to find the tendency exemplified in the pottery
fabrics of those two centres, and at Chalkis, as has already been noted
(p. 321), it is especially conspicuous in the form and minor details of
the vases. At Athens examples are rare, with the exception of the vases
of Nikosthenes, who not only copies complete vases in metal, as in his
peculiarly-shaped amphorae and in a small _phiale mesomphalos_ in the
British Museum,[1512] but is also addicted to adorning the handles of
jugs with female heads in relief, as on specimens in the Louvre and
elsewhere.[1513] After the sixth century the tendency is far less
conspicuous, owing to the high esteem in which vase-painting was then
held, and little is seen of attempts at imitating metal until the
revival of the plastic element in pottery in the fourth century. An
almost unique exception is the Berlin krater from Corinth (2882), which
must date from the fifth century. It is of black ware, with designs in
relief round the body.[1514]

The tendency also manifests itself in a marked degree in another
direction in early Greek art—namely, in that of ornamenting vases with
reliefs. So much evidence of this has been yielded by discoveries on
Greek soil that it is now certain that this method of decoration had
its origin in Greece, and not in Etruria, although the close
resemblance between early relief-wares from Rhodes and the large p????
of Cervetri (see p. 153) had led archaeologists in the past to regard
Etruria as its original home. The Etruscans always preferred modelled
vases or relief decoration to painted ware, as their _bucchero_ fabrics
show; but we know that they had no inventive power, and even in this
they have proved to be only imitators.[1515]

Turning to details of the early Greek vases with reliefs, we may note
that there are two varieties: firstly, those in which the reliefs are
made by rolling a cylinder round the vase, the design being repeated
over again; secondly, those in which the reliefs are made from separate
moulds, and attached with some kind of cement.[1516] In both classes
the shape usually affected is that of a large p???? (cf. p. 151), of a
somewhat coarse red clay. It is the first variety which so closely
resemble the p???? found at Cervetri, and which are now known to be the
prototypes, not imitations, of the Etruscan examples.[1517]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                             PLATE XLVII

[Illustration:

  From ?f. ???.
  ARCHAIC PITHOS WITH RELIEFS FROM BOEOTIA (ATHENS MUS.).
]

                  ------------------------------------

In Greece fragments of the first class have been found on the Acropolis
at Athens, the recurring design being a two-horse chariot which a
warrior mounts, with a scorpion in the field. The similarity in the
clay, the shape, and the technique of the reliefs with the Cervetri
vases is remarkable; the subject is one common on Corinthian vases.
Other fragments have been found at Tanagra, and there is a good example
in the Louvre with a series of figures, representing a dance of women,
all of similar types, yet not from the same stamp, but different
moulds.[1518] The variations of detail in dress and hair show
conclusively that the cylinder process is not employed here, but that
the figures are freely modelled from a single type. The costume is that
typical of the women on early B.F. vases (cf. p. 372). Some very fine
examples of p???? with reliefs, dating from the end of the seventh
century, have been published by De Ridder.[1519] They are all from
Boeotia, and are similar to those made in Rhodes, but with the
characteristic ornamental handles of metallic form. Here again the
figures are freely modelled with variations of detail, and they afford
interesting points of comparison with the painted vases and with the
early bronze reliefs which are variously attributed to Corinth and
Chalkis.[1520] One in Athens (_Cat._ 462) has the interesting subject
of Artemis Diktynna; another (_Cat._ 466 = Plate XLVII.), an
accouchement scene. Similar finds have been made in Kythnos, Tenos,
Crete, and Rhodes,[1521] the ornamentation being for the most part
purely geometrical, but sometimes with Centaurs or human figures.[1522]
In none of these examples is there any peculiarly Etruscan feature; all
is purely Hellenic, presenting close analogies not only with metal-work
in relief, but also with the Oriental art to which the Greek work of
that age was so much indebted, as in the case of the cylinder
process.[1523]

A new method of decorating vases, which first makes its appearance
towards the end of the fifth century, is by means of _appliqué_
reliefs. It is doubtless due to the influence of sculpture, and perhaps
more especially to that of the bronze reliefs which on vases and
mirror-cases were now becoming popular. The former influence is clearly
at work in the great Kertch vase with the contest of Athena and
Poseidon (Plate L.), where we may see in the two central figures, which
are modelled in relief and applied to the surface of the vase, an
undoubted reminiscence of the western Parthenon pediment. There are
also vases from Athens, Kertch, the Cyrenaica, and Southern
Italy,[1524] in which the figures are either partially or wholly
modelled in relief, like the vase of Xenophantos or a fine lekythos in
the British Museum (G 23) representing the rape of Kassandra by Ajax.
Another fine specimen, found at Cumae and now at Petersburg, has a
group of Eleusinian deities in relief on the shoulder.[1525] Yet
another example, recently found at Lampsakos, has the Calydonian
boar-hunt as its subject; the figures are in relief on a gilded
ground.[1526]

The imitation of metal technique[1527] is even more marked in the vases
of Southern Italy than in those from other parts. At Capua, Cumae, and
Metapontum amphorae, hydriae, and oinochoae are found, covered with a
very brilliant black varnish, but without any painted decoration; the
only ornament is in the form of gilded wreaths and other simple
patterns, or designs in relief. The British Museum has a fine series
from Capua with garlands of foliage and ornaments in the form of
festoons and pendants, the whole forming, as M. Collignon says, “a
brilliant and luxurious system of decoration which contrasts with the
sober taste of the Attic potters.” Some of the hydriae are clearly of
local fabric, imitations of the Campanian hydriae of bronze.[1528] The
forms are often very elaborate, with ornamental handles, ribbed bodies,
and moulded stems. An oinochoë has been found with an inscription which
gives the names of le?a for smooth-surfaced vases, ?aßd?t? for those
ribbed or fluted. Heavy imitations of the gilt and relief wares have
often been found at Alexandria,[1529] and isolated specimens occur in
Attica, Rhodes, and the Cyrenaica.

The growing fashion of using only vases of chased gold and silver in
preference to painted pottery made itself more and more felt both in
Greece and Italy during the Alexandrine period. The same tendency which
we have already noted, to reproduce as far as possible the
characteristics and appearance of metal, may be observed in all the
pottery of this period. Not only do the subjects moulded in relief
reproduce the appearance of the chased and _repoussé_ designs, but the
shapes are those of the metal vases, and even in the black glaze there
are attempts to produce a metallic effect. It is clear that the pottery
of this period presents throughout the effect of a striving after
outward show on the part of those who were unable to afford the more
precious metal for their household utensils, and were forced to be
content with imitating it to the best of their ability in the humbler
material.

In Greece this tendency is best illustrated by a series of vases known
as Megarian or Homeric bowls, of hemispherical form,[1530] without
handles. The former name was given to them by Dumont[1531] and
Benndorf,[1532] but with little authority beyond the fact that several
were found at Megara. But they might on equally good grounds be called
Boeotian, others having been found at Thebes and elsewhere in the
neighbourhood. They have also been found in Kalymnos, Crete, and
Cyprus, but the majority are from Thebes, Tanagra, and Anthedon.
Professor Robert thinks they may be identified with the _vasa Samia_ so
often mentioned by ancient writers (see Chapter XXII.), and refers to
the µast?? dedicated at Oropos and Paphos.[1533] All are of red clay,
with a thin metallic black glaze giving a quasi-metallic appearance;
the hemispherical form is only departed from in one or two
instances.[1534]

The other name, Homeric, has been applied to them by Professor Robert
with reference to the well-known passage of Suetonius, which describes
Nero as using bowls (_scyphi_) called Homeric because they were chased
with subjects from Homer’s poems.[1535] Our clay examples would then be
reproductions of the chased metal vases, used by those who could not
afford originals, and corresponding in some degree to modern plaster
casts. It is true that only five of the examples we possess have
subjects from Homer; but most of the others may be so called as
belonging to the Epic cycle. They thus differ from most relief-vases of
the period, in that the designs are not purely decorative or
repetitions of simple motives, but are, so to speak, “illustrations of
the classics.”

Professor Robert distinguishes two classes: (1) those with figures made
from separate stamps, attached to the vase after it was made, and often
repeated; (2) vases made wholly, figures and all, in a mould, like the
Arretine wares.[1536] In the latter case they were doubtless made from
the same moulds as the metal vases, and of this we have an undoubted
example, not indeed among the “Megarian” bowls, but in analogous
specimens from Italy. It has already been noted (p. 134) that in the
British Museum there are two examples of a silver bowl with _repoussé_
designs, representing round the interior four deities in chariots,
which form part of a silver treasure found at Èze in the south of
France; and that in the same collection there is also a clay bowl
(_Cat._ G 118 = Plate XLVIII., fig. 5) which exactly reproduces the
silver vase in shape, size, and decoration.

Among the subjects we have the rape of Persephone[1537]; the sacrifice
of Iphigeneia; Achilles and Priam[1538]; the flight to the ships (from
the _Iliad_), the sack of Troy and the sacrifice of Polyxena; the
destruction of the suitors (from the _Odyssey_). From the Theban legend
we have the stories of Oedipus’s childhood and the Seven against
Thebes[1539]; other vases give the labours of Herakles or his rape of
Auge (Plate XLVIII., fig. 2)[1540]; and a jug made by Dionysios has the
interesting subject of Autolykos and Sisyphos.[1541] The British Museum
possesses a very interesting bowl with scenes taken directly from the
_Phoenissae_ of Euripides,[1542] and other comparisons with that author
may be made in the case of the bowls with Iphigeneia and Polyxena.
Sometimes the scenes are inscribed with verses from the poems or plays
illustrated, or with a prose description of the scene,[1543] or merely
with the names of the figures. The letters in all cases are raised. It
is clear that all these bowls belong to the same period and fabric, and
many small details point to the third century as their date. We may
bear in mind that this was the time of the great revival of Homeric
study at Alexandria.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                            PLATE XLVIII

[Illustration: GREEK VASES OF HELLENISTIC PERIOD: BLACK WARE WITH
RELIEFS (BRITISH MUSEUM).]

                  ------------------------------------

In Italy the introduction of relief wares became general as painting
was abandoned, but did so gradually, not suddenly. In the third century
both existed side by side. The principle of a purely mechanical process
in pottery, which now first appears in the manufacture from a mould,
was not, strictly speaking, a new one in Italy, nor yet in Greece. It
is first seen in the early Etruscan and Rhodian vases (see p. 496) with
stamped and rolled-out designs repeated in long friezes. And we shall
see later how for several centuries moulded vases, in the form of
_bucchero_ ware, formed the national pottery of Etruria. There was
always in Etruscan, as also in Greek pottery,[1544] a tendency towards
the imitation of metal, and this tendency about the fourth century
seems to have spread over the rest of Italy, even to the Iapygian
Peninsula. Thus it is that the vases of Gnatia (p. 488) are largely
metallic in form and treatment, with their ribbed bodies and other
details. To the same cause is mainly due the series of Capua and Cumae
vases which has already been discussed, with its brilliant varnish and
gilding. Signor Gamurrini actually gave to the Italian black glaze
wares the name of “Etrusco-Campanian.”[1545] After the disappearance of
_bucchero_ ware similar vases came to be made at Cervetri, Chiusi,
Corneto, and Bolsena, the principal art centres of Etruria. At Bolsena
in particular they have been found in considerable numbers; and as this
city (_Volsinium novum_) was only founded in 264 B.C., a _terminus post
quem_ for their date is afforded.

A group of vases found chiefly at the last-named place[1546] does not
appear to have been covered with black varnish, but with a metallic
preparation of gold or silver, which has now mostly disappeared, and
they are left with the plain glazed clay. Some of these are not without
merit. In the general arrangement of the designs, usually in friezes
round the shoulder, there is obviously a reminiscence of _bucchero_
ware. The metallic preparation with which they were covered may have
been something of the kind which Athenaeus[1547] describes in speaking
of certain drinking-cups made at Naukratis, which “were dipped [in some
preparation] so as to appear silver.”

In Italy the manufacture of vases of black ware with reliefs appears to
have centred at Cales in Campania during the third century.[1548] The
principal type is that of a bowl, not of the hemispherical form, but
shallow, with the designs in the interior, either in the form of a
frieze or of a central medallion. These are usually called Calene
phialae, but it is not certain whether the majority were really made at
Cales. At all events, it is, like “Megarian bowl,” a convenient name
for the class. The British Museum bowl G 118, with the frieze of
chariots (see above), is a good example of the frieze type of design.
The subject, which is treated in a very spirited manner, is the
apotheosis of Herakles, who is conducted by Athena, Ares, and Artemis
to Olympos, accompanied by Victories. There is also a good specimen in
Berlin (_Cat._ 3882) with Odysseus and the Sirens. Another with
decorative patterns only, bears the signature of the potter, L.
Canoleios of Cales, in Latin letters.[1549] Examples are also given in
Plate XLVIII., figs. 3, 5, 6.

Of the type with central medallions comparatively few complete examples
exist, but the British Museum possesses a series of fragments on which
the medallions have been preserved.[1550] The subjects are usually
those characteristic of the Alexandrine period: Aphrodite, Adonis, and
Erotes; Herakles and Hylas, and others familiar from Theocritus; or
Trojan scenes, such as Thetis with the arms of Achilles or Paris
attacked by Deiphobos. A unique instance is that of Romulus and Remus
suckled by the wolf (G 125). Two names of potters occur—K. Atilius and
G. Gabinius. The date of these phialae is probably that of the Second
Punic War (about 230–200 B.C.). The designs, being taken from
moulds[1551] and inserted separately, are frequently repeated. The
fashion—obviously another instance of imitation of metal[1552]—of
adorning bowls with central designs also takes other forms at this
period. Simple heads of deities or Satyrs are found, and there are also
instances of facsimiles of Syracusan coins. Two bowls in the British
Museum (G 121–22) have in the centre copies of a decadrachm with the
head of Persephone (Plate XLVIII., fig. 4: cf. p. 210).[1553]

Analogous to these in character and technique are the series of small
lamp-feeders or _gutti_, a variation of the _askos_ form, which are
found chiefly in Southern Italy, but also in North Africa and the
Eastern Mediterranean.[1554] In the latter case they are usually
distinguished by having an arched handle over the back instead of the
usual ring-handle at the side, and the body is flatter. The Italian
type has a deep ribbed body, with a flat circular space on the top
containing a design in relief, made separately and inserted in the vase
(Plate XLVIII., fig. 1). The range of subjects is wide, but the
majority are mythological: heads or masks of a Dionysiac character or
of Medusa form a large proportion of the whole.

Larger vases of black ware with reliefs inserted or attached are
sometimes found, but are not common. The British Museum possesses two
good specimens—a krater (G 29) with panels inserted bearing
mythological designs,[1555] and a large covered jar (G 28) with the
inscription BASSVS in Roman letters, presumably the potter’s name. The
subjects, in two friezes, represent Erotes and festoons of vine-leaves,
and Poseidon and Victory, five times repeated.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The series of vases which we have been discussing are clearly paving
the way for the new development of pottery which prevailed throughout
the Roman period—that of the ware formerly known as Samian, but now
usually spoken of as Arretine or (a more comprehensive term) _Terra
sigillata_. This will of course be more appropriately dealt with in a
subsequent chapter under the heading of Roman Pottery. In the course of
the second century the Roman dominion spread over most of the Greek
lands, and Greek art as an independent entity almost ceased to exist.
It is, however, not a little remarkable at what a late date some forms
of distinctively Greek pottery lingered on in Hellenic regions, such as
Attica, Egypt, and Southern Russia. The subject has hitherto received
but little attention, and the materials have hardly been collected with
sufficient completeness to admit of adequate discussion and
classification.[1556]

-----

Footnote 1409:

  See Hesych. _s.v._ p???????; Athenag. _Leg. pro Christo_, 17, p. 293;
  also p. 316.

Footnote 1410:

  See Loeschcke in _Ath. Mitth._ 1879, p. 289 ff. The revision of
  chronology since his article was written has only served to give
  additional support to his view, bringing the white vases nearer in
  date to the painted stelae.

Footnote 1411:

  _Brut._ xviii. 70: see also Plut. _de defect. orac._ 47, 436 C;
  Pliny, _H.N._ xxxv. 50.

Footnote 1412:

  See _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, ii. B 613 ff.

Footnote 1413:

  Winter in _Arch. Zeit._ 1885, p. 195 ff.

Footnote 1414:

  _Ibid._ p. 187 ff.: cf. also Hartwig in _Jahrbuch_, 1899, p. 160.

Footnote 1415:

  _Arch. Zeit._ 1885, pl. 12. Cf. B.M. D 22, 32; Dumont-Pottier, i. pl.
  11; Rayet and Collignon, pl. 10, 1. The severe type of face should be
  compared with Attic coins of the fifth century.

Footnote 1416:

  Cf. _Arch. Zeit._ 1881, p. 35.

Footnote 1417:

  Cf. B.M. D 65 and Fig. 19, p. 143.

Footnote 1418:

  _E.g._ B.M. D 21, 33.

Footnote 1419:

  As on the Anesidora cup in the British Museum (D 4) and the
  Euphronios cup in Berlin (2282).

Footnote 1420:

  _Mon. dell’ Inst._ x. 37 _a_; _Annali_, 1877, p. 287.

Footnote 1421:

  _Cat._ 208, 332, 336; published in Jahn, _Entführ. d. Europa_, pl. 7;
  Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 49 (Fig. 121); and Overbeck,
  _Kunstmythol. Atlas_, pl. 9, No. 19.

Footnote 1422:

  Rayet and Collignon, p. 223: see _Anzeiger_, 1891, p. 69, where it is
  attributed to Sotades.

Footnote 1423:

  _E.g._ B.M. D 11 = Plate XLIII. fig. 1; _Mon. Grecs_, 1878, pl. 2 (in
  Louvre).

Footnote 1424:

  Also attributed by Furtwaengler to Sotades (_Anzeiger_, _loc. cit._).

Footnote 1425:

  Formerly in the collection of M. van Branteghem: see his Sale Cat.
  Nos. 159–66, and Plate XL.

Footnote 1426:

  A complete list of white-ground cups is given by Hartwig,
  _Meistersch._ p. 499. Among signed examples are the Euphronios cup in
  Berlin (2282); those by Sotades and Hegesiboulos (p. 445), and also
  _Mon. dell’ Inst._ x. 37_a_ (—??? ?p???se?).

Footnote 1427:

  _White Athenian Vases_, p. 5.

Footnote 1428:

  See generally Pottier, _Les Lécythes Blancs_.

Footnote 1429:

  In the B.M. collection, D 52 is from Locri, D 28, 47, 63, 87 from
  Gela.

Footnote 1430:

  _E.g._ B.M. D 33, 54–7, 62; Athens 1625 ff.

Footnote 1431:

  See Dumont-Pottier, ii. pp. 50, 53.

Footnote 1432:

  Notably Athens 688 = Reinach, i. p. 164 (_Mon. dell’ Inst._ viii. pl.
  4).

Footnote 1433:

  For references to this subject on the lekythi see Chapter XIII., and
  for a typical example, _ibid._, Fig. 122. For the different types see
  (1) Athens 1662–63; (2) B.M. D 61; (3) Berlin 2680–81, Athens 1661.

Footnote 1434:

  x. 28, 1.

Footnote 1435:

  On the forms of the stele see Brueckner, _Ornament und Form der
  attischen Grabstelen_.

Footnote 1436:

  As for instance Naples 1755 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1848, fig. 1939.
  See also Roscher, iii. p. 967; B.M. F 57.

Footnote 1437:

  Cf. also B.M. D 54; Pottier, pls. 2, 4; and see Chapter XIII.

Footnote 1438:

  We may recall the _dictum_ of Aristotle (_Poet._ 2) that Polygnotos
  painted men better (or more beautiful) than reality.

Footnote 1439:

  _E.g._ B.M. D 54, D 56; and another with horsemen unpublished.

Footnote 1440:

  It may be noted conversely that Attic tombstones were often in the
  form of lekythi (e.g. _B.M. Cat. of Sculpt._ i. Nos. 681–82, 687 ff.).

Footnote 1441:

  See the list of non-funerary subjects given by Pottier, _op. cit._ p.
  5. Cf. also B.M. D 21, 51, 57, D 19 and 24 (Nike), 31 (Iris), and 23
  (priestess of Athena).

Footnote 1442:

  _Lécythes Blancs_, p. 103.

Footnote 1443:

  Examples are: Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ pls. 26, 33.

Footnote 1444:

  _E.g._ Athens 1626; Benndorf, pl. 18, fig. 2, pl. 20, fig. 2.

Footnote 1445:

  _E.g._ Benndorf, pl. 24, figs. 1, 3.

Footnote 1446:

  _Jahrbuch_, ix. (1894), p. 57 ff.

Footnote 1447:

  Milchhoefer attributes this to Hiero’s victory in 474; but the date
  seems too early compared with other evidence.

Footnote 1448:

  The latest R.F. vase from Kameiros is the polychrome “pelike” E 424
  in the British Museum. Furtwaengler (_Gr. Vasenmalerei_, p. 205)
  gives reasons for dating it in the third century; but the
  circumstances of its discovery at Kameiros render so late a date
  improbable, apart from considerations of style.

Footnote 1449:

  Hartwig in _Mélanges d’Arch._ 1894, p. 11.

Footnote 1450:

  See above, p. 60, for the sites on which they have been found; also
  the plates of the Atlas to Stephani’s _Compte-Rendu_ and of the _Ant.
  du Bosph. Cimmérien_.

Footnote 1451:

  See above, p. 447.

Footnote 1452:

  _E.g._ B.M. F 4–7, 23, 27–9.

Footnote 1453:

  See on this group of vases some very illuminating remarks by
  Furtwaengler in his _Meisterwerke_, p. 149.

Footnote 1454:

  See also what is said below (p. 485) on early Apulian fabrics.

Footnote 1455:

  See his _Ceramica Antica_, _passim_.

Footnote 1456:

  See generally Chapter IV., p. 162 ff.

Footnote 1457:

  Cf. B.M. F 193, F 210, F 542.

Footnote 1458:

  See also below, p. 485.

Footnote 1459:

  The subject has been fully treated by Vogel, _Scenen Eurip.
  Tragödien_; Huddilston, _Gk. Tragedy in Vase-paintings_; and
  Engelmann, _Arch. Studien zu den Tragikern_: see also _B.M. Cat. of
  Vases_, iv. p. 10.

Footnote 1460:

  See _J.H.S._ xi. p. 228.

Footnote 1461:

  See Körte in _Jahrbuch_, viii. (1893), p. 61 ff.

Footnote 1462:

  Dio Cassius, _frag._ 39, _ed._ Bekker.

Footnote 1463:

  Helbig, ii. p.314, No. 121 = Schreiber-Anderson, _Atlas_, pl. 5, fig.
  8: see also B.M. F 150.

Footnote 1464:

  See Chapter XV. § 3. They are also fully discussed by Heydemann in
  _Jahrbuch_, i. p. 260 ff.

Footnote 1465:

  See also Vol. II. Fig. 134.

Footnote 1466:

  Cf. a tomb with paintings at Tritaea in Achaia described by
  Pausanias, vii. 22, 4.

Footnote 1467:

  Cf. Roscher, _Lexikon_, i. p. 2441 ff. (_s.v._ Heros); _J.H.S._ v. p.
  105 ff.; _Brit. Mus. Cat. of Sculpt._ i. p. 293 ff.; Furtwaengler,
  _Coll. Sabouroff_, i. p. 17 ff.

Footnote 1468:

  Possibly a mistake for, or variation of, the name Dasimos, which
  occurs on a fourth-century bronze votive helmet from Southern Italy
  in the British Museum (_Cat._ 317).

Footnote 1469:

  _E.g._ B.M. F 150–6; Naples 1778, 1779, 1782, 1787, 3248; and others
  given by Patroni, _Ceramica Antica_, p. 77. A vase published by
  Inghirami (_Vasi Fitt._ 1–3) is thought by Engelmann to be the work
  of Python (_Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1874, p. 35). But this hardly seems
  likely. The B.M. vase F 155 is much more after his style.

Footnote 1470:

  Two of these vases in the British Museum (F 150–51) are in the style
  of Assteas. Furtwaengler assigns all, including that signed by A., to
  Campania. It is, however, more likely that they were mostly made at
  Paestum. The one in Rome with Zeus and Alkmena (see p. 473) may be by
  Python.

Footnote 1471:

  _Mon. dell’ Inst._ viii. pl. 21.

Footnote 1472:

  See note above and Patroni, p. 71.

Footnote 1473:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 159, 160, 174.

Footnote 1474:

  See above, p. 172.

Footnote 1475:

  See Patroni, _op. cit._ p. 25, and Chapter XVIII. It appears in the
  vase-painting given in Fig. 108.

Footnote 1476:

  Cf. that worn by Herakles on the Assteas vase, Fig. 107.

Footnote 1477:

  See Plate XLIV. and _B.M. Cat. of Bronzes_, No. 2845.

Footnote 1478:

  _Mon. dell’ Inst._ viii. pl. 21 and _Annali_, 1865, p. 262 ff.: cf.
  Virg. _Aen._ vii. 785; ix. 365. See also _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, p. 20.

Footnote 1479:

  Naples 856; B.M. F 213 (?).

Footnote 1480:

  Naples 2293 and R.C. 141 = Reinach, i. 387; Berlin 3023.

Footnote 1481:

  B.M. F 191 ff.; Naples 871, 2855, 3368.

Footnote 1482:

  Patroni thinks that such vases as Jatta 1498 (= Reinach, i. 110, 4)
  have formed the model for these Saticula vases.

Footnote 1483:

  _E.g._ Naples 2852.

Footnote 1484:

  _E.g._ B.M. F 143–148; Naples 3093, 3129: see _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1893,
  p. 93.

Footnote 1485:

  _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, iv., F 523 ff.

Footnote 1486:

  F 542: see above, p. 471.

Footnote 1487:

  _Röm. Mitth._ 1887, pl. 10, p. 231.

Footnote 1488:

  _E.g._ Reinach, i. 448 = _Arch. Zeit._ 1883, pl. 7; Dubois
  Maisonneuve, _Introd._ pl. 69; Naples 3241 = Reinach, i. 384, 1–3;
  Naples 2416, 2418, 2894, 2918, 3247; see Patroni, _Ceram. Antica_, p.
  33, and Furtwaengler, _Meisterwerke_, p. 149.

Footnote 1489:

  _E.g._ B.M. F 237, 238 (wrongly attributed to Campania in Catalogue).

Footnote 1490:

  See B.M. F 297, 301, and _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1852, pls. M, N, P, p.
  316 ff.

Footnote 1491:

  B.M. F 254–68; Berlin 3607–19; Naples 2542–61; Petersburg 1693–1710.
  Cf. _Notizie degli Scavi_, 1894, p. 107, and _Ath. Mitth._ 1901, pl.
  2 (an example from the Acropolis at Athens); also a plate inscribed
  underneath [??TV??] (Schöne in _Comm. Phil. in hon. Mommseni_, p.
  653). See also p. 194 and Chapter XV.

Footnote 1492:

  See Chapter XVIII. For examples of these degenerate vases see _B.M.
  Cat._ iv. F 490 ff.

Footnote 1493:

  In this he is followed by Rayet and Collignon (p. 328).

Footnote 1494:

  Lenormant, however, states that they have been found at Tarentum, as
  also in the neighbourhood of Lecce and Bari (_Gaz. Arch._ 1881–82, p.
  103).

Footnote 1495:

  Rayet and Collignon, pl. 13, p. 330.

Footnote 1496:

  _Excavations in Cyprus_, p. 77, fig. 140.

Footnote 1497:

  See also B.M. F 553; _Ath. Mitth._ 1901, pls. 3, 4, p. 70 ff.;
  Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 276.

Footnote 1498:

  See _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1884, p. 5 ff.; Rayet and Collignon, p. 332.
  Fourteen or fifteen examples are known.

Footnote 1499:

  One was found by Lord Savile at Civita Lavinia (Lanuvium) in recent
  years (_Notizie degli Scavi_, 1895, p. 45). They have also been found
  on the Esquiline (see _Röm. Mitth._ 1887, p. 233).

Footnote 1500:

  _Excavations in Cyprus_, pl. 3.

Footnote 1501:

  For terracotta examples painted in _tempera_ see _B.M. Cat. of
  Terracottas_, B 281–91; and compare B 286 with an example from
  Cyprus, Perrot, _Hist. de l’Art_, iii. p. 697. See also Berlin 1292
  ff.

Footnote 1502:

  See for a terracotta example B 460 in B.M.; also B 203–4 from Rhodes.
  Cf. Dumont-Pottier, i. chap. xiii.

Footnote 1503:

  _Röm. Mitth._ v. (1890), pl. 11, p. 313 ff.

Footnote 1504:

  _Cat._ 2190: cf. _Röm. Mitth._ 1890, p. 316.

Footnote 1505:

  Klein, _Meistersig._^2 p. 216; Berlin 2202. A vase in the Louvre
  with the ?a???-name Epilykos is probably by Prokles (see _Monuments
  Piot_, ix. p. 142).

Footnote 1506:

  See Rayet and Collignon, p. 261: for other examples, B.M. E 786, 792,
  793; Berlin 4044 = _Coll. Sabouroff_, pl. 69; _Mus. Greg._ ii. 89, 1;
  and the Kleomenes vase in the Louvre (if genuine). See on this vase
  _Mon. Grecs_, 1897, pls. 16–7, p. 53; Furtwaengler, _Neuere
  Falschungen_, p. 21; _Rev. Arch._ xxxvii. (1900), p. 181; _Monuments
  Piot_, ix. p. 138.

Footnote 1507:

  See Hartwig in ?f. ???. 1894, pl. 6, p. 121.

Footnote 1508:

  Stephani, _Compte-Rendu_, 1870–71, pl. 1; _Ber. d. sächs. Gesellsch._
  1853, pls. 1–2 (with Eros, dove, and swan): cf. the B.M. terracottas,
  D 89–91.

Footnote 1509:

  See Rayet and Collignon, p. 275, and for other examples Stackelberg,
  _Gräber der Hell._ pls. 49–52; Treu, _Gr. Thongef._ pl. 1; _Cab.
  Pourtalès_, pl. 28.

Footnote 1510:

  Cf. the Proto-Attic vases, Athens 468 and 657, with the B.M. bronze
  vase-handles, Nos. 258, 383.

Footnote 1511:

  Cf. the Aegina jug mentioned above, B.M. A 1369 and the vase given in
  Rayet and Collignon, p. 68; also the Tanagra tripod, Berlin No. 1727,
  and Louvre A 396 from Rhodes.

Footnote 1512:

  See B.M. B 295, 296, 382.

Footnote 1513:

  Louvre F 116–17; B.M. B 620. See _Arch. Zeit._ 1881, p. 36, and p.
  385 above.

Footnote 1514:

  Cf. _Coll. Sabouroff_, pl. 74, 3: see also _Ath. Mitth._ 1880, pl.
  10; ?f. ???. 1885, pl. 9, 11; B.M. G 22–3; Berlin 2704, 2884;
  Raoul-Rochette, _Mon. Inéd._ pl. 49, 3.

Footnote 1515:

  Cf. _Röm. Mitth._ 1897, p. 253 ff.; _Mon. Grecs_, 1885–88, p. 43 ff.;
  Rayet and Collignon, p. 341; _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1888, p. 491.

Footnote 1516:

  Cf. Dumont-Pottier, i. p. 186 ff.

Footnote 1517:

  See _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1888, p. 491 (Pottier).

Footnote 1518:

  _Ibid._ p. 497; also _Mon. Grecs_, 1885–88, pl. 8, p. 44: cf. the
  Etruscan _bucchero_ vases, _e.g._ Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 316
  ff.

Footnote 1519:

  _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1898, pp. 439, 497.

Footnote 1520:

  De Ridder, _De ectypis aeneis_, _passim_.

Footnote 1521:

  _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1888, p. 500; _Ath. Mitth._ 1886, pl. 4
  (Crete).

Footnote 1522:

  _E.g._ B.M. A 587, 597 ff.

Footnote 1523:

  For a complete list of early vases with reliefs see _Mon. Grecs_,
  1885–88, p. 54 ff.

Footnote 1524:

  For examples see Rayet and Collignon, p. 266; _Jahrbuch_ 1894, p. 62.

Footnote 1525:

  _Cat._ 525 = Reinach, i. 11.

Footnote 1526:

  _Monuments Piot_, x. pls. 6–7.

Footnote 1527:

  On the later development of imitation of metal in vases see Rizzo in
  _Röm. Mitth._ xii. (1897), p. 253 ff.

Footnote 1528:

  See also on these vases _Gaz. Arch._ 1879, pl. 6, p. 38 ff., and
  Martha, _L'Art Étrusque_, p. 488. They are styled by Gamurrini
  “Etrusco-Campanian.”

Footnote 1529:

  _Amer. Journ. of Arch._ 1885, pl. 1.

Footnote 1530:

  To this the name µast?? has been given: cf. p. 186.

Footnote 1531:

  _Céramiques_, i. p. 393.

Footnote 1532:

  _Gr. u. sic. Vasenb._ p. 117.

Footnote 1533:

  _Homerische Becher_, in _50^{tes} Winckelmannsfestprogr._ (1890).

Footnote 1534:

  G 104 in B.M. and the jug by Dionysios (Robert, _op. cit._ p. 90).

Footnote 1535:

  _Op. cit._ p. 1 ff.: cf. Suet. _Ner._ 47.

Footnote 1536:

  Clay moulds for these bowls have been found at Athens, suggesting
  that there was a fabric there. But they were probably not confined to
  one centre. See _Ath. Mitth._ 1901, p. 67, note.

Footnote 1537:

  _J.H.S._ xxii. p. 3.

Footnote 1538:

  _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1904, p. 191 (in Oxford).

Footnote 1539:

  Cf. _Mon. Grecs_, 1885–88, p. 48.

Footnote 1540:

  Berlin 2891, from Crete.

Footnote 1541:

  See Robert, _op. cit._ p. 90. In the same work will be found full
  descriptions of most of the other bowls.

Footnote 1542:

  See _Class. Review_, 1894, p. 325.

Footnote 1543:

  _E.g._ G 105, in B.M.

Footnote 1544:

  See above, p. 495.

Footnote 1545:

  See above, p. 498.

Footnote 1546:

  B.M. G 179 ff.: see _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1871, p. 5 ff.; _Röm. Mitth._
  1897, p. 260; _Notizie degli Scavi_, 1897, p. 390.

Footnote 1547:

  xi. 480 E: see above, pp. 73, 189.

Footnote 1548:

  _Gaz. Arch._ 1879, p. 43. Recent writers have maintained that
  “Calene” ware is Greek in origin, and not confined to this site. See
  Dragendorff in _Bonner Jahrbücher_, xcvi. p. 25, and Rizzo in _Röm.
  Mitth._ 1897, p. 259: cf. Berlin 3882.

Footnote 1549:

  Benndorf, _Gr. u. sic. Vasenb._ pl. 56.

Footnote 1550:

  _Ibid._ pls. 57–8.

Footnote 1551:

  For instances of moulds for these medallions see _B.M. Cat. of
  Terracottas_, E 72–4.

Footnote 1552:

  See _Röm. Mitth._ 1897, p. 260.

Footnote 1553:

  See Evans, _Syracusan Medallions_, in _Num. Chron._ 3rd Ser. xi. p.
  319; also _Rev. Arch._ xxiv. (1894). p. 173.

Footnote 1554:

  See _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, iv., G 37 ff., and above, pp. 200, 211.

Footnote 1555:

  A similar example is in the Athens Museum, from Crete (_Invent._ No.
  2141).

Footnote 1556:

  Reference may be made generally to important articles by Watzinger in
  _Ath. Mitth._ 1901, p. 50 ff., and Dragendorff in _Bonner
  Jahrbücher_, ci. p. 140 ff.; also (for Egypt) to _Amer. Journ. of
  Arch._ 1885, p. 18 ff., and Furtwaengler in _Gr. Vasenm._ p. 205 ff.
  See also Chapter XXII., and XXI. _init._

                             END OF VOL. I.

    _Printed by Hazell, Watson & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury._




                      Mr. Murray’s Standard Works

  =Berenson=, Bernhard. THE DRAWINGS OF THE FLORENTINE PAINTERS.
      Classified, Criticised, and Studied as Documents in the History
      and Appreciation of Tuscan Art. With a Copious Catalogue
      Raisonné, and 180 Facsimile Illustrations. 2 Vols. Folio. £21 net.

  =Borgia=, Lucretia, THE LIFE OF. According to Original Documents and
      Correspondence of her Day. By FERDINAND GREGOROVIUS. Translated
      by JOHN LESLIE GARNER. With Illustrations. Large Crown 8vo.
      10_s._ 6_d._ net.

  =Brown=, Prof. G. Baldwin. THE FINE ARTS. The Origin, Aims, and
      Conditions of Artistic Work as applied to Painting, Sculpture,
      and Architecture. _New and Enlarged Edition._ With Illustrations.
      Crown 8vo. 6_s._ net.

  —— THE ARTS IN EARLY ENGLAND. With Illustrations. 3 Vols. Royal 8vo.
      16_s._ net. each.

   Vol. I. THE LIFE OF SAXON ENGLAND IN ITS RELATION TO THE ARTS.

   Vol. II. ECCLESIASTICAL ARCHITECTURE IN ENGLAND FROM THE CONVERSION
      OF THE SAXONS TO THE NORMAN CONQUEST.

   Vol. III. THE DECORATIVE ARTS OF THE ANGLO-SAXON PERIOD.

  =Brugsch=, Professor. EGYPT UNDER THE PHARAOHS. History derived
      entirely from the Monuments. _Third Edition._ Revised by M.
      BRODRICK. Maps, Plans, and Illustrations. Demy 8vo. 18_s._

  =Burton-Brown=, E. RECENT EXCAVATIONS IN THE ROMAN FORUM, 1898–1905.
      A Handbook. Illustrations and Plans. Fcap 8vo. 2_s._ net.

  =Cartwright=, Julia (Mrs. Ady). THE PAINTERS OF FLORENCE. From the
      13th to the 16th Centuries. Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 6_s._ net.

  =Cripps=, Wilfrid. OLD ENGLISH PLATE: Ecclesiastical, Decorative, and
      Domestic: Its Makers and Marks. _Eighth Edition._ Revised and
      Enlarged. With 123 Illustrations and 2,600 Facsimile Plate Marks.
      8vo. 21_s._ net.

      ? Tables of the Date-Letters and Marks sold separately. 5_s._

  —— OLD FRENCH PLATE: Its Makers and Marks. With Tables of Makers’
      Marks, in addition to the Plate Marks. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

  =Crowe=, Sir J. A., and =Cavalcaselle=, G. B. A HISTORY OF PAINTING
      in Italy, Umbria, Florence, and Siena, from the 2nd to the 16th
      Century. A New Edition, with Editorial Notes by LANGTON DOUGLAS,
      with upwards of 200 Illustrations. Large Demy 8vo. 6 Vols. 21_s._
      net each.

   Vol. I. EARLY CHRISTIAN ART.

   Vol. II. GIOTTO AND THE GIOTTESQUES.

  —— —— RAPHAEL: His Life and Works. Demy 8vo. Vol. I., 15_s._

  =Cust=, Lionel. NOTES ON THE AUTHENTIC PORTRAITS OF MARY QUEEN OF
      SCOTS. Based on the Researches of the late Sir George Scharf,
      Director of the National Portrait Gallery—Re-written in the light
      of new information. With many Illustrations. Small 4to. £3 3_s._
      net.

  =Douglas=, Langton. SIENA, HER HISTORY AND ART. With Maps and
      numerous Illustrations. Medium 8vo. 25_s._ net.

  =Fanshawe=, H. C. DELHI: PAST AND PRESENT. With Maps and
      Illustrations. Demy 8vo. 15_s._ net.

  =Fergusson=, James. HISTORY OF ARCHITECTURE IN ALL COUNTRIES FROM THE
      EARLIEST TIMES. With 1,700 Illustrations. 5 Vols. Medium 8vo. £6
      6_s._

   Vols. I. and II. ANCIENT AND MEDIÆVAL. 63_s._

   Vol. III. INDIAN AND EASTERN. 31_s._ 6_d._

   Vols. IV. and V. MODERN. 31_s._ 6_d._

  [Arrangements have been made with Booksellers enabling them to offer
              special terms for the above work complete.]

  =Hodgson=, J. E., and =Eaton=, F. A. THE ROYAL ACADEMY AND ITS
      MEMBERS. A History from 1768 to 1830. With Portraits. Large Demy
      8vo. 21_s._ net.

  =Hogarth=, D. G., Edited by. AUTHORITY AND ARCHÆOLOGY, SACRED AND
      PROFANE. Essays on the Relation of Monuments to Biblical and
      Classical Literature. By VARIOUS WRITERS. _Second Edition._ Demy
      8vo. 16_s._

  =Jameson=, Mrs. LIVES OF THE EARLY ITALIAN PAINTERS—AND THE PROGRESS
      OF PAINTING IN ITALY—CIMABUE TO BASSANO. With 50 Portraits. Post
      8vo. 12_s._

  =Kugler’s = HANDBOOK OF PAINTING. The Italian Schools of Painting.
      _Sixth Edition_, revised. By Sir _Henry Layard_, G.C.B. With
      nearly 250 Illustrations. 2 Vols. Demy 8vo. 30_s._

  —— The German, Flemish, and Dutch Schools.  _Third Edition_, revised.
      By Sir J. A. CROWE. With 60 Illustrations. 2 Vols. Crown 8vo.
      24_s._

  =Layard=, Sir A. Henry. NINEVEH AND ITS REMAINS. With Illustrations.
      Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

  —— NINEVEH AND BABYLON. Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

  —— EARLY ADVENTURES IN PERSIA, BABYLONIA, AND SUSIANA. Portrait,
      Illustrations, and Maps. 2 Vols. Crown 8vo. 24_s._ _Popular
      Edition_ in 1 Vol. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

  —— AUTOBIOGRAPHY AND LETTERS, from his Childhood until his
      Appointment as H.M. Ambassador at Madrid. With an additional
      Chapter on his Parliamentary Career by the Right Hon. Sir ARTHUR
      OTWAY. Edited by the Hon. WILLIAM NAPIER BRUCE. With Portraits
      and Illustrations. 2 Vols. Demy 8vo. 25_s._ net.

  =Mariette=, Auguste. OUTLINES OF ANCIENT EGYPTIAN HISTORY. _Second
      Edition._ Edited, with Notes, by MARY BRODRICK. Crown 8vo. With
      Map. 5_s._

  =Marillier=, H. C.  THE LIVERPOOL SCHOOL OF PAINTERS.  An Account of
      the Liverpool Academy, from 1810 to 1867. With Memoirs of the
      Leading Artists. With Illustrations. Square Demy 8vo. 10_s._
      6_d._ net.

  =Maudslay=, A. P. and A. C. A GLIMPSE AT GUATEMALA. Some Notes on the
      Ancient Monuments of Central America. With Maps, Plans, 74
      Photogravures, and other Illustrations. 4to. £4 4_s._ net.

  =Morelli=, Giovanni. ITALIAN PAINTERS. Critical Studies of their
      Works. With an Introductory Notice by Sir HENRY LAYARD, G.C.B.
      With numerous Illustrations. Demy 8vo. 2 Vols. 15_s._ each.

   Vol. I. THE BORGHESE AND DORIA PAMPHILI GALLERIES IN ROME.

   Vol. II. THE GALLERIES OF MUNICH AND DRESDEN.

  =Murray=, A. S. A HISTORY OF GREEK SCULPTURE FROM THE EARLIEST TIMES.
      With 130 Illustrations. 2 Vols. Medium 8vo. 36_s._

  —— HANDBOOK OF GREEK ARCHÆOLOGY. Sculpture, Vases, Bronzes, Gems,
      Terra-cottas, Architecture, Mural Paintings, etc. Many
      Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 18_s._

  —— THE SCULPTURES OF THE PARTHENON. With Illustrations of the whole
      Remains. Medium 8vo. 21_s._ net.

  =Okakura=, Kakuzo. THE IDEALS OF THE EAST, with special reference to
      the Art of Japan. Crown 8vo. 5_s._ net.

  =Phillipps=, Evelyn March. THE FRESCOES IN THE SIXTINE CHAPEL IN
      ROME. With 24 Illustrations and a Photogravure Frontispiece.
      Crown 8vo. 6_s._ net.

  =Smith=, Sir Wm., =Dictionaries=:—

      DICTIONARY OF THE BIBLE; Comprising its Antiquities, Biography,
        Geography, and Natural History. By VARIOUS WRITERS. With
        Illustrations. 3 Vols. _Enlarged and Revised Edition._ Medium
        8vo. £4 4_s._

         [Complete sets of the above work may be purchased through any
                         Bookseller at reduced rates.]

      CONCISE DICTIONARY OF THE BIBLE. Medium 8vo. 21_s._

      SMALLER DICTIONARY OF THE BIBLE. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

      DICTIONARY OF CHRISTIAN ANTIQUITIES. The History, Institutions,
        and Antiquities of the Christian Church. Edited by Sir W.
        SMITH, D.C.L., and Archdeacon CHEETHAM, D.D. With
        Illustrations. 2 Vols. Medium 8vo. £3 13_s._ 6_d._ each.

      DICTIONARY OF CHRISTIAN BIOGRAPHY, LITERATURE, SECTS, AND
        DOCTRINES. Edited by Sir WM. SMITH, D.C.L., and HENRY WACE,
        D.D. 4 Vols. Medium 8vo. £6 16_s._ 6_d._

      DICTIONARY OF GREEK AND ROMAN ANTIQUITIES. Including the Laws,
        Institutions, Domestic Usages, Painting, Sculpture, Music, the
        Drama,t?µpa?a etc. Edited by Sir WM. SMITH, WILLIAM WAYTE,
        M.A., G. E. MARINDIN, M.A. _Third Revised and Enlarged
        Edition._ With 900 Illustrations, 2 Vols. Medium 8vo. 31s.
        6_d._ each.

      CONCISE DICTIONARY OF GREEK AND ROMAN ANTIQUITIES. Edited by F.
        WARRE CORNISH, M.A. With over 1,100 Illustrations taken from
        the best examples of Ancient Art. Medium 8vo. 21_s._

      SMALLER DICTIONARY OF GREEK AND ROMAN ANTIQUITIES. With 200
        Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

      DICTIONARY OF GREEK AND ROMAN BIOGRAPHY AND MYTHOLOGY.
        Illustrated by 564 Engravings on Wood. In 3 Vols. Medium 8vo.
        £4 4_s._

      CLASSICAL DICTIONARY OF BIOGRAPHY, MYTHOLOGY, AND GEOGRAPHY.
        _Thoroughly Revised Edition._ By G. E. MARINDIN, M.A. With over
        800 Woodcuts. 8vo. 18_s._

      SMALLER CLASSICAL DICTIONARY OF BIOGRAPHY, MYTHOLOGY, AND
        GEOGRAPHY. With 200 Woodcuts. In great part re-written by G. E.
        MARINDIN, M. A. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

      DICTIONARY OF GREEK AND ROMAN GEOGRAPHY. Illustrated by 534
        Engravings on Wood. 2 Vols. Medium 8vo. 56_s._

      COMPLETE LATIN-ENGLISH DICTIONARY. With Tables of the Roman
        Calendar, Measures, Weights, Money, and a Dictionary of Proper
        Names. Medium 8vo. 16_s._

      SMALLER LATIN-ENGLISH DICTIONARY. By Sir WM. SMITH and T. D.
        HALL, M.A. Square 12mo. 7_s._ 6_d._

      COPIOUS AND CRITICAL ENGLISH-LATIN DICTIONARY. By Sir WM. SMITH,
        D.C.L., and T. D. HALL, M.A. Medium 8vo. 16_s._

      SMALLER ENGLISH-LATIN DICTIONARY. By Sir WM. SMITH and T. D.
        HALL, M.A. Square 12mo. 7_s._ 6_d._

  =Van Millingen=, A. THE WALLS OF CONSTANTINOPLE. Studies of the
      Topography of the Byzantine City and adjacent objects of
      interest. Plans and Illustrations. 4to. 21_s._ net.

  =Wakeman’s= HANDBOOK OF IRISH ANTIQUITIES. Edited by JOHN COOKE, M.A.
      With numerous Illustrations. _Third Edition._ Crown 8vo. 10_s._
      6_d._ net.

  =Ward=, John. THE SACRED BEETLE. Egyptian Scarabs in Art and History.
      Illustrated. Demy 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._ net.

  —— GREEK COINS AND THEIR PARENT CITIES. With 22 Autotype Plates and
      upwards of 500 Illustrations. Crown 4to. 25_s._ net.

  —— OUR SOUDAN: ITS PYRAMIDS AND ITS PROGRESS. Dedicated by request to
      Lord Kitchener of Khartoum. Crown 4to. 400 Pages, 720
      Illustrations. 21_s._ net. Including Maps and many Portraits.

  =Watt=, Sir George. INDIAN ART AT DELHI, 1903. Being the Official
      Catalogue of the Delhi Exhibition, 1902–3. The Illustrative part
      by PERCY BROWN, A.R.C.A., Assistant-Director. Medium 8vo. 12_s._
      net.

  =Welbeck Catalogue.= A CATALOGUE OF LETTERS AND OTHER HISTORICAL
      DOCUMENTS IN THE LIBRARY AT WELBECK. Compiled by S. ARTHUR
      STRONG. With Portraits and numerous Facsimiles of Manuscripts in
      the possession of the Duke of Portland. 4to. £2 2_s._ net.

  =Wilkinson=, Sir J. G. THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF THE ANCIENT
      EGYPTIANS. With numerous Illustrations. 3 Vols. Demy 8vo. £4 4_s._

  —— POPULAR ACCOUNT OF THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. Abridged from the above
      work. With 500 Woodcuts. 2 Vols. Crown 8vo. 12_s._

               London: JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.




                          Transcriber’s Note:

Errors which can be attributed to printer’s mistakes have been
corrected, as noted below. Lapses in punctuation are corrected with no
further mention.

In Volume II, the author has included as Fig. 173 a table of alphabets
used on Greek vases.

Inscriptions are presented in archaic Greek script, which more or less
follows that table. For instance, the character for pi (?) resembles
the modern gamma (G). All inscriptions are given using modern Greek
characters. References to individual characters may appear with very
brief descriptions, derived where possible from that table. The
character upsilon (?) frequently appears as a modern Roman V. On
occasion, sigma appears in the form of a modern C (the lunate sigma ?).

Footnotes, which were numbered sequentially on each page, have been
resequenced to be unique across the text. Cross-references to those
numbers in the text have been changed to reflect this. The notes
themselves have been moved to the end of each chapter.

Each plate was followed by a blank page on its verso, which have been
removed here. The position of each plate, as well as that of all other
figures, has been adjusted slightly to avoid falling in mid-paragraph.
The pages devoted to plates were not counted in pagination.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The following anomalies regarding footnotes were observed:

On p. 153, the reference to the third footnote (521), referring the
reader to “Pottier _Louvre Cat._, p. 381 ff.” does not appear in the
text. The section discusses “Les vases à reliefs de style archaique en
Italie et en Sicile”. The reference has been added following the
paragraph ending with “designs of Oriental character”.

On p. 158, the reference to footnote (531) is missing from the text.
The reference has been added at the end of the sentence beginning
“Falkner found at Pompeii...”.

On p. 210, the sole footnote is missing its number, which is added here
as 770.

On p. 214, the reference to the first footnote (775), referring the
reader to Alexandre Brongniart’s _Traité des arts céramiques: ou des
poteries_, i., p 552, does not appear in the text. The passage
discusses the analysis of the glaze, and it seems appropriate to add
the reference at the end of the paragraph beginning “This lustrous
glaze...”.

On p. 427, footnote 1314 refers to a series of items, the last of which
(‘270’) seems either out of order, or a misprint for ‘470’.

The following table contains those textual issues which are readily
attributed to printer’s errors:

      p. 96 which[,] were so light                   Removed
     p. 204 It has been noted by J[o/a]hn            Corrected.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of History of Ancient Pottery.  Volume 1
(of 2), by H. B. Walters

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF ANCIENT POTTERY, VOL 1 ***

***** This file should be named 48154-0.txt or 48154-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/8/1/5/48154/

Produced by KD Weeks, Chris Curnow and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg EBook of History of Ancient Pottery.  Volume 2 (of 2), by 
H. B. Walters

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: History of Ancient Pottery.  Volume 2 (of 2)
       Greek, Etruscan, and Roman

Author: H. B. Walters

Release Date: February 7, 2015 [EBook #48155]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF ANCIENT POTTERY, VOL 2 ***




Produced by KD Weeks, Chris Curnow and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)






Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical
effects. Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_. Bold
font is delimited by the ‘=’ character. Superscripted and subscripted
characters are shown as ‘^2’ and ‘_{2}’ respectively.

This text includes the rendering of ancient Greek inscriptions, using
the alphabets of a number of different regions, not all of which exist
in the unicode character set. Some are printed in reverse order (right
to left) and some are also mirror-imaged. It is not possible to render
these inscriptions as text without a wholesale loss of information
about the variant forms. Each inscription, therefore, is simply
rendered using modern Greek characters, including several archaic
characters (koppa = ? and digamma= ?) which are supported in unicode
fonts. These inscriptions are better viewed, obviously, in the HTML or
epub versions which can be found at Project Gutenberg.

Minor errors and inconsistency in punctuation and formatting have been
silently corrected. Please see the transcriber’s note at the end of
this text for details regarding the handling of any other textual
issues encountered during its preparation.

Footnotes appeared in the printed text numbered sequentially on each
page. They have been renumbered to be unique across the text, and are
gathered at the end of each chapter. The occasional references to them
by the original number have been changed as well.

Volume I of this text is available separately from Project Gutenberg at:

    http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/48154

         ------------------------------------------------------




                       HISTORY OF ANCIENT POTTERY

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                              PLATE XLIX

[Illustration:

  ATTIC BLACK-FIGURED HYDRIA:
  HARNESSING OF HORSES TO CHARIOT
  (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

         ------------------------------------------------------




                       HISTORY OF ANCIENT POTTERY
                       GREEK, ETRUSCAN, AND ROMAN

                     BY H. B. WALTERS, M.A., F.S.A.
                          BASED ON THE WORK OF
                              SAMUEL BIRCH

                             IN TWO VOLUMES
                               VOLUME II

                         WITH 300 ILLUSTRATIONS
                      INCLUDING 8 COLOURED PLATES

                             [ILLUSTRATION]

                                NEW YORK
                        CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS
                                  1905

                               PRINTED BY
                             HAZELL, WATSON
                            AND VINEY, LD.,
                         LONDON AND AYLESBURY,
                                ENGLAND.




                         CONTENTS OF VOLUME II


                                                                    PAGE


 CONTENTS OF VOLUME II                                                 v

 LIST OF PLATES IN VOLUME II                                          ix

 LIST OF TEXT-ILLUSTRATIONS IN VOLUME II                              xi



                                PART III

                      THE SUBJECTS ON GREEK VASES

                                   –
                              CHAPTER XII
                  _INTRODUCTORY—THE OLYMPIAN DEITIES_

 Figured vases in ancient literature—Mythology and
 art—Relation of subjects on vases to literature—Homeric and
 dramatic themes and their treatment—Interpretation and
 classification of subjects—The Olympian deities—The
 Gigantomachia—The birth of Athena and other Olympian
 subjects—Zeus and kindred subjects—Hera—Poseidon and marine
 deities—The Eleusinian deities—Apollo and
 Artemis—Hephaistos, Athena, and Ares—Aphrodite and
 Eros—Hermes and Hestia                                             1–53


                              CHAPTER XIII
                  _DIONYSOS AND MISCELLANEOUS DEITIES_

 Dionysos and his associates—Ariadne, Maenads, and
 Satyrs—Names of Satyrs and Maenads—The Nether World—General
 representations and isolated subjects—Charon, Erinnyes,
 Hekate, and Thanatos—Cosmogonic deities—Gaia and
 Pandora—Prometheus and Atlas—Iris and
 Hebe—Personifications—Sun, Moon, Stars, and
 Dawn—Winds—Cities and countries—The Muses—Victory—Abstract
 ideas—Descriptive names                                           54–92


                              CHAPTER XIV
                            _HEROIC LEGENDS_

 Kastor and Polydeukes—Herakles and his twelve labours—Other
 contests—Relations with deities—Apotheosis—Theseus and his
 labours—Later scenes of his life—Perseus—Pelops and
 Bellerophon—Jason and the Argonauts—Theban legends—The
 Trojan cycle—Peleus and Thetis—The Judgment of Paris—Stories
 of Telephos and Troilos—Scenes from the Iliad—The death of
 Achilles and the Fall of Troy—The Odyssey—The Oresteia—Attic
 and other legends—Orpheus and the
 Amazons—Monsters—Historical and literary subjects                93–153


                               CHAPTER XV
                     _SUBJECTS FROM ORDINARY LIFE_

 Religious subjects—Sacrifices—Funeral scenes—The Drama and
 burlesques—Athletics—Sport and games—Musical scenes—Trades
 and occupations—Daily life of women—Wedding scenes—Military
 and naval subjects—Orientals and Barbarians—Banquets and
 revels—Miscellaneous subjects—Animals                           154–186


                              CHAPTER XVI
           _DETAILS OF TYPES, ARRANGEMENT, AND ORNAMENTATION_

 Distinctions of types—Costume and attributes of individual
 deities— Personifications—Heroes—Monsters—Personages in
 everyday life—Armour and shield-devices—Dress and
 ornaments—Physiognomical expression on vases—Landscape and
 architecture—Arrangement of subjects—Ornamental
 patterns—Maeander, circles, and other geometrical
 patterns—Floral patterns—Lotos and palmettes—Treatment of
 ornamentation in different fabrics                              187–235


                              CHAPTER XVII
                     _INSCRIPTIONS ON GREEK VASES_

 Importance of inscriptions on vases—Incised
 inscriptions—Names and prices incised underneath
 vases—Owners’ names and dedications—Painted
 inscriptions—Early Greek alphabets—Painted inscriptions on
 early vases—Corinthian, Ionic, Boeotian, and Chalcidian
 inscriptions—Inscriptions on Athenian vases—Dialect—Artists’
 signatures—Inscriptions relating to the
 subjects—Exclamations—?a???-names—The Attic alphabet and
 orthography—Chronology of Attic inscriptions—South Italian
 vases with inscriptions                                         236–278


                                PART IV

                            ITALIAN POTTERY

                             CHAPTER XVIII
                  _ETRUSCAN AND SOUTH ITALIAN POTTERY_

 Early Italian civilisation—Origin of Etruscans—Terramare
 civilisation—Villanuova period—Pit-tombs—Hut-urns—Trench-
 tombs—Relief-wares and painted vases from Cervetri—Chamber-
 tombs—Polledrara ware—Bucchero ware—Canopic jars—Imitations
 of Greek vases—Etruscan inscriptions—Sculpture in
 terracotta—Architectural decoration—Sarcophagi—Local pottery
 of Southern Italy—Messapian and Peucetian fabrics               279–329


                              CHAPTER XIX
            _TERRACOTTA IN ROMAN ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE_

 Clay in Roman architecture—Use of bricks—Methods of
 construction—Tiles—Ornamental antefixae—Flue-tiles—Other
 uses—Inscriptions on bricks and tiles—Military tiles—Mural
 reliefs—List of subjects—Roman sculpture in
 terracotta—Statuettes—Uses at Rome—Types and
 subjects—Gaulish terracottas—Potters and centres of
 fabric—Subjects—Miscellaneous uses of terracotta—Money-boxes
 —Coin-moulds                                                    330–392


                               CHAPTER XX
                             _ROMAN LAMPS_

 Introduction of lamps at Rome—Sites where found—Principal
 parts of lamps—Purposes for which used—Superstitious and
 other uses—Chronological account of forms—Technical
 processes—Subjects—Deities—Mythological and literary
 subjects—_Genre_ subjects and animals—Inscriptions on
 lamps—Names of potters and their distribution—Centres of
 manufacture                                                     393–429


                              CHAPTER XXI
         _ROMAN POTTERY: TECHNICAL PROCESSES, SHAPES, AND USES_

 Introductory—Geographical and historical limits—Clay and
 glaze—Technical processes—Stamps and moulds—_Barbotine_ and
 other methods—Kilns found in Britain, Gaul, and Germany—Use
 of earthenware among the Romans—Echea—Dolia and
 Amphorae—Inscriptions on amphorae—Cadus, Ampulla, and Lagena
 —Drinking-cups—Dishes—Sacrificial vases—Identification of
 names                                                           430–473


                              CHAPTER XXII
          _ROMAN POTTERY, HISTORICALLY TREATED; ARRETINE WARE_

 Roman Pottery mentioned by ancient writers—“Samian”
 ware—Centres of fabric—The pottery of
 Arretium—Characteristics—Potters’ stamps—Shapes of Arretine
 vases—Sources of inspiration for decoration—“Italian
 Megarian bowls”—Subjects—Distribution of Arretine wares         474–496


                             CHAPTER XXIII
            _ROMAN POTTERY (continued); PROVINCIAL FABRICS_

 Distribution of Roman pottery in Europe—Transition from
 Arretine to provincial wares—_Terra sigillata_—Shapes and
 centres of fabric—Subjects—Potters’ stamps—Vases with
 _barbotine_ decoration—The fabrics of Gaul—St.
 Rémy—Graufesenque—“Marbled” vases—Vases with inscriptions
 (Banassac)—Lezoux—Vases with medallions (Southern
 Gaul)—Fabrics of Germany—_Terra sigillata_ in Britain—Castor
 ware—Upchurch and New Forest wares—Plain
 pottery—_Mortaria_—Conclusion                                   497–555


 INDEX                                                               557

                      LIST OF PLATES IN VOLUME II

           (_Except where otherwise noted, the objects are in
                          the British Museum_)

   PLATE


   XLIX. Attic black-figured hydria: Harnessing of horses
         to chariot (_colours_)                           _Frontispiece_


                                                          TO FACE PAGE

      L. Contest of Athena and Poseidon: vase at
         Petersburg (from Baumeister)                                 24

     LI. Kotyle by Hieron: Triptolemos at Eleusis                     26

    LII. The Under-world, from an Apulian vase at Munich
         (from Furtwaengler and Reichhold)                            66

   LIII. Helios and Stars (the Blacas krater)                         78

    LIV. The Sack of Troy: kylix by Brygos in Louvre
         (from Furtwaengler and Reichhold)                           134

     LV. Scenes from funeral lekythi (Prothesis and cult
         of tomb)                                                    158

    LVI. Early Etruscan red ware                                     300

   LVII. Etruscan hut-urn and Bucchero ware                          302

  LVIII. Etruscan imitations of Greek vases                          308

    LIX. Etruscan antefix and sarcophagus                            316

     LX. Sarcophagus of Seianti Thanunia                             322

    LXI. Roman mural reliefs: Zeus and Dionysos                      366

   LXII. Roman mural reliefs: Theseus; priestesses                   370

  LXIII. Roman lamps (1st century B.C.)                              402

   LXIV. Roman lamps: mythological and literary subjects             412

    LXV. Roman lamps: miscellaneous subjects                         416

   LXVI. Moulds and stamp of Arretine ware                           492

  LXVII. Gaulish pottery (Graufesenque fabric)                       520

 LXVIII. Gaulish pottery from Britain (Lezoux fabric)                526

   LXIX. Romano-British and Gaulish pottery                          544




                LIST OF TEXT-ILLUSTRATIONS IN VOLUME II

    FIG.                                                           PAGE

    111. Gigantomachia, from Ionic vase _Mon. dell’ Inst._
         in Louvre                                                   13

    112. Poseidon and Polybotes, from   _Gerhard_
         kylix in Berlin                                             14

    113. The birth of Athena            _Brit. Mus._                 16

    114. Hermes slaying Argos (vase at  _Wiener Vorl._
         Vienna)                                                     20

    115. Poseidon and Amphitrite        _Ant. Denkm._
         (Corinthian pinax)                                          23

    116. Apollo, Artemis, and Leto      _Mon. dell’ Inst._           30

    117. Aphrodite and her following    ?f. ???.
         (vase at Athens)                                            43

    118. Eros with kottabos-stand       _Brit. Mus._                 48

    119. Hermes with Apollo’s oxen (in  _Baumeister_
         the Vatican)                                                51

    120. Dionysos with Satyrs and       _Brit. Mus._
         Maenads (Pamphaios hydria)                                  59

    121. Maenad in frenzy (cup at       _Baumeister_
         Munich)                                                     63

    122. Charon’s bark (lekythos at     _Baumeister_
         Munich)                                                     70

    123. Thanatos and Hypnos with body  _Brit. Mus._
         of warrior                                                  71

    124. Nike sacrificing bull          _Brit. Mus._                 88

    125. Herakles and the Nemean lion   _Brit. Mus._                 96

    126. Herakles bringing the boar to  _Brit. Mus._
         Eurystheus                                                  97

    127. Apotheosis of Herakles (vase   _Arch. Zeit._
         at Palermo)                                                107

    128. Peleus seizing Thetis          _Brit. Mus._                121

    129. Judgment of Paris (Hieron cup  _Wiener Vorl._
         in Berlin)                                                 122

    130. Capture of Dolon               _Brit. Mus._                129

    131. Pentheus slain by Maenads      _Brit. Mus._                142

    132. Kroisos on the funeral pyre    _Baumeister_
         (Louvre)                                                   150

    133. Alkaios and Sappho (Munich)    _Baumeister_                152

    134. Scene from a farce             _Brit. Mus._                161

    135. Athletes engaged in the        _Brit. Mus._
         Pentathlon                                                 163

    136. Agricultural scenes            _Baumeister_
         (Nikosthenes cup in Berlin)                                170

    137. Warrior arming; archers        _Hoppin_
         (Euthymides amphora in Munich)                             176

    138. Banqueters playing kottabos    _Brit. Mus._                181

    139. Maeander or embattled pattern                              212

    140. Maeander (Attic)                                           212

    141. Maeander (Ionic)                                           212

    142. Maeander and star pattern                                  212

    143. Maeander (Attic, 5th century)                              213

    144. Maeander (Attic, about 480
         B.C.)                                                      213

    145. Net-pattern                                                215

    146. Chequer-pattern                                            216

    147. Tangent-circles                                            216

    148. Spirals under handles
         (Exekias)                                                  217

    149. Wave-pattern (South Italy)                                 218

    150. Scale-pattern (Daphnae)                                    218

    151. Guilloche or plait-band
         (Euphorbos pinax)                                          219

    152. Tongue-pattern                                             219

    153. Egg-pattern                                                220

    154. Leaf- or chain-pattern                                     221

    155. Ivy-wreath (black-figure
         period)                                                    222

    156. Ivy-wreath (South Italian)                                 222

    157. Laurel-wreath (South Italian)                              223

    158. _Vallisneria spiralis_
         (Mycenaean)                                                224

    159. Lotos-flower (Cypriote)                                    224

    160. Lotos-flowers and buds         _Riegl_
         (Rhodian)                                                  225

    161. Palmette-and lotos-pattern
         (early B.F.)                                               225

    162. Lotos-buds (Attic B.F.)                                    226

    163. Chain of palmettes and lotos
         (early B.F.)                                               226

    164. Palmettes and lotos under
         handles (Attic B.F.)                                       227

    165. Palmette on neck of red-bodied
         amphorae                                                   228

    166. Enclosed palmettes (R.F.
         period)                                                    228

    167. Oblique palmettes (late R.F.)                              229

    168. Palmette under handles (South
         Italian)                                                   230

    169. Rosette (Rhodian)                                          231

    170. Rosette (Apulian)                                          231

    171. Facsimile of inscription on    _Brit. Mus._
         Tataie lekythos                                            242

    172. Facsimile of Dipylon           _Ath. Mitth._
         inscription                                                243

    173. Scheme of alphabets on Greek
         vases                                                      248

    174. Facsimile of inscription on    _Roehl_
         Corinthian pinax                                           251

    175. Facsimile of signatures on     _Furtwaengler and
         François vase                  Reichhold_                  257

    176. Facsimile of signature of      _Brit. Mus._
         Nikias                                                     259

    177. Figure with inscribed scroll
         (fragment at Oxford)                                       264

    178. Etruscan tomb with cinerary    _Ann. dell’ Inst._
         urn                                                        285

    179. Villanuova cinerary urns from  _Notizie_
         Corneto                                                    286

    180. Painted pithos from Cervetri   _Gaz. Arch._
         in Louvre                                                  293

    181. Canopic jar in bronze-plated   _Mus. Ital._
         chair                                                      305

    182. Etruscan alphabet, from a vase _Dennis_                    312

    183. Terracotta sarcophagus in      _Dennis_
         Brit. Mus.                                                 318

    184. Painted terracotta slab in     _Dennis_
         Louvre                                                     319

    185. Askos of local Apulian fabric  _Brit. Mus._                326

    186. Krater of “Peucetian” fabric   _Notizie_                   328

    187. Concrete wall at Rome          _Middleton_                 338

    188. Concrete wall faced with brick _Middleton_                 339

    189. Concrete arch faced with brick _Middleton_                 339

    190. Diagram of Roman wall-         _Blümner_
         construction                                               340

    191. Roman terracotta antefix       _Brit. Mus._                343

    192. Method of heating in Baths of  _Middleton_
         Caracalla                                                  347

    193. Flue-tile with ornamental
         patterns                                                   348

    194. Stamped Roman tile             _Brit. Mus._                354

    195. Inscribed tile in Guildhall
         Museum                                                     359

    196. Inscribed tile from London                                 363

    197. Mask with name of potter       _Brit. Mus._                377

    198. Gaulish figure of Aphrodite    _Blanchet_                  383

    199. Gaulish figure of Epona        _Blanchet_                  386

    200. Terracotta money-box           _Jahrbuch_                  390

    201. Terracotta coin-mould          _Daremberg and
                                        Saglio_                     392

    202. Lamp from the Esquiline        _Ann. dell Inst._           399

    203. “Delphiniform” lamp                                        399

    204. Lamp with volute-nozzle                                    400

    205. Lamp with pointed nozzle                                   400

    206. Lamp with grooved nozzle                                   401

    207. Lamp with plain nozzle                                     401

    208. Lamp with heart-shaped nozzle                              402

    209. Mould for lamp                 _Brit. Mus._                405

    210. Lamp with signature of Fortis  _Brit. Mus._                424

    211. Stamps used by Roman potters                               440

    212. Roman kiln at Heddernheim      _Ann. dell’ Inst._          444

    213. Kiln found at Castor                                       447

    214. Plan of kiln at Heiligenberg   _Daremberg and
                                        Saglio_                     450

    215. Section of ditto               _Daremberg and
                                        Saglio_                     450

    216. Ampulla                        _Brit. Mus._                466

    217. Lagena from France                                         467

    218. Arretine bowl in Boston: death _Philologus_
         of Phaëthon                                                484

    219. Arretine krater with Seasons   _Brit. Mus._                488

    220. “Italian Megarian” bowl        _Brit. Mus._                491

    221. Gaulish bowl of Form 29                                    500

    222. Gaulish bowl of Form 30                                    501

    223. Gaulish bowl of Form 37                                    502

    224. Vase of St.-Rémy fabric        _Déchelette_                517

    225. Vase of Aco, inscribed         _Déchelette_                518

    226. Vase of Banassac fabric from   _Mus. Borb._
         Pompeii                                                    525

    227. Medallion from vase of         _Brit. Mus._
         Southern Gaul: scene
         from the _Cycnus_                                          531

    228. Medallion from vase: Atalanta  _Gaz. Arch._
         and Hippomedon                                             532

    229. Jar from Germany, inscribed    _Brit. Mus._                537

    230. Roman mortarium from           _Brit. Mus._
         Ribchester                                                 551




                               PART III
                       THE SUBJECTS ON GREEK VASES




                              CHAPTER XII
                   _INTRODUCTORY—THE OLYMPIAN DEITIES_

    Figured vases in ancient literature—Mythology and art—Relation of
      subjects on vases to literature—Homeric and dramatic themes and
      their treatment—Interpretation and classification of
      subjects—The Olympian deities—The Gigantomachia—The birth of
      Athena and other Olympian subjects—Zeus and kindred
      subjects—Hera—Poseidon and marine deities—The Eleusinian
      deities—Apollo and Artemis—Hephaistos, Athena, and
      Ares—Aphrodite and Eros—Hermes and Hestia.


The representation of subjects from Greek mythology or daily life on
vases was not, of course, confined to fictile products. We know that
the artistic instincts of the Greeks led them to decorate almost every
household implement or utensil with ornamental designs of some kind, as
well as those specially made for votive or other non-utilitarian
purposes. But the fictile vases, from the enormous numbers which have
been preserved, the extraordinary variety of their subjects, and the
fact that they cover such a wide period, have always formed our chief
artistic source of information on the subject of Greek mythology and
antiquities.

Although (as has been pointed out in Chapter IV.) ancient literature
contains scarcely any allusions to the painted vases, we have many
descriptions of similar subjects depicted on other works of art, such
as vases of wood and metal, from Homer downwards. The cup of Nestor
(Vol. I. pp. 148, 172) was ornamented with figures of doves[1], and
there is the famous description in the first Idyll of Theocritus[2] of
the wooden cup (??ss?ß???) which represented a fisherman casting his
net, and a boy guarding vines and weaving a trap for grasshoppers,
while two foxes steal the grapes and the contents of his dinner-basket;
the whole being surrounded, like the designs on some painted vases,
with borders of ivy and acanthus. The so-called cup of Nestor
(?est????) at Capua[3] was inscribed with Homeric verses, and the
s??f?? or cup of Herakles with the taking of Troy[4]. Anakreon
describes cups ornamented with figures of Dionysos, Aphrodite and Eros,
and the Graces[5]; and Pliny mentions others with figures of Centaurs,
hunts and battles, and Dionysiac subjects[6]. Or, again, mythological
subjects are described, such as the rape of the Palladion[7], Phrixos
on the ram[8], a Gorgon and Ganymede[9], or Orpheus[10]; and other
“storied” cups are described as being used by the later Roman emperors.
But the nearest parallels to the vases described in classical
literature are probably to be sought in the chased metal vases of the
Hellenistic and Roman periods.[11] We read of _scyphi Homerici_, or
beakers with Homeric scenes, used by the Emperor Nero, which were
probably of chased silver[12]; and we have described in Chapter XI.
what are apparently clay imitations of these vases, usually known as
“Megarian bowls,” many bearing scenes from Homer in relief on the
exterior.

In attempting a review of the subjects on the painted vases, we are met
with certain difficulties, especially in regard to arrangement. This is
chiefly due to the fact that each period has its group of favourite
subjects; some are only found in early times, others only in the later
period. Yet any chronological method of treatment will be found
impossible, and it is hoped that it will, as far as possible, be
obviated by the general allusions in the historical chapters of this
work to the subjects characteristic of each fabric and period.

Embracing as they do almost the whole field of Greek myth and legend,
the subjects on Greek vases are yet not invariably those most familiar
to the classical student or, if the stories are familiar, they are not
always treated in accordance with literary tradition. On the other
hand, it must be borne in mind that the popular conception of Greek
mythology is not always a correct one, for which fact the formerly
invariable system of approaching Greek ideas through the Latin is
mainly responsible. The mythology of our classical dictionaries and
school-books is largely based on Ovid and the later Roman compilers,
such as Hyginus, and gives the stories in a complete connected form,
regarding all classical authorities as of equal value, and ignoring the
fact that many myths are of gradual growth and only crystallised at a
late period, while others belong to a relatively recent date in ancient
history.[13]

The vases, on the other hand, are contemporary documents, free from
later euhemerism and pedantry, and presenting the myths as the Athenian
craftsmen knew them in the popular folk-lore and religious observances
of their day. It cannot be too strongly insisted upon that a
vase-painter was never an illustrator of Homer or any other writer, at
least before the fourth century B.C. (see Vol. I. p. 499). The epic
poems, of course, contributed largely to the popular acquaintance with
ancient legends, and offered suggestions of which the painter was glad
to avail himself; but he did not, therefore, feel bound to adhere to
his text. This will be seen in the list of Homeric subjects given below
(p. 126 ff.); and we may also refer here to the practice of giving
fanciful names to figures, which obtains at all periods, and has before
now presented obstacles to the interpreter.

The relation of the subjects on vases to Greek literature is an
interesting theme for enquiry, though, in view of what has already been
said, it is evident that it must be undertaken with great caution. The
antiquity and wide popularity of the Homeric poems, for instance, would
naturally lead us to expect an extensive and general use of their
themes by the vase-painter. Yet this is far from being the case. The
_Iliad_, indeed, is drawn upon more largely than the _Odyssey_; but
even this yields in importance as a source to the epics grouped under
the name of the Cyclic poets. It may have been that the poems were
instinctively felt to be unsuited to the somewhat conventional and
monotonous style of the earlier vase-paintings, which required simple
and easily depicted incidents. We are therefore the more at a loss to
explain the comparative rarity of subjects from the _Odyssey_, with its
many adventures and stirring episodes; scenes which may be from the
_Iliad_ being less strongly characterised and less unique—one
battle-scene, for instance, differing little from another in method of
treatment. But any subject from the _Odyssey_ can be at once identified
by its individual and marked character. It may be that the _Odyssey_
had a less firm hold on the minds of the Greeks than the _Iliad_, which
was more of a national epic, whereas the _Odyssey_ was a stirring
romance.[14] It may also be worth noting that scenes from the _Odyssey_
usually adhere more closely to the Homeric text than those from the
_Iliad_.

Another reason for the scarcity of Iliad-scenes may be that the Tale of
Troy as a whole is a much more comprehensive story, of which the
_Iliad_ only forms a comparatively small portion. Hence the large
number of scenes drawn both from the Ante-Homerica and the
Post-Homerica, such as the stories of Troilos and Memnon, or the sack
of Troy. The writings of the Cyclic poets begin, as Horace reminds us,
_ab ovo_,[15] from the egg of Leda, and the Kypria included the whole
story of the marriage of Peleus and Thetis, the subsequent Judgment of
Paris, and his journey to Greece after Helen, scenes from all these
events being extremely popular on the vases.[16] The _Patrokleia_ deals
with the events of the earlier years of the war, the _Aithiopis_ of
Arktinos with the stories of Penthesileia and Memnon, and the death of
Achilles, and the _Little Iliad_ of Lesches with the events of the
tenth year down to the fall of Troy. All provided frequent themes for
the vase-painter, as may be seen by a reference to a later page (119
ff.). The _Iliupersis_ of Arktinos and Lesches might almost be
reconstructed from two or three large vases, whereon all the episodes
of the catastrophe are collected together (see p. 134); but when we
come to the _Nostoi_ of Agias and the Telegonia, the vase-painters
suddenly fail us, the stories of Odysseus’ wanderings and Orestes’
vengeance seeming to supply the deficiency.

Luckenbach[17] has pointed out that the only right method of
investigating the relation is to begin with vase-paintings for which
the sources are absolutely certain, as with scenes from the _Iliad_ and
_Odyssey_. In this way the subjects from other epics can be rightly
estimated and the contents of the poems restored. Further, in
investigating the sources of the vase-painters, and the extent to which
they adhered to them or gave free play to the imagination, the three
main periods of vase-painting must be separately considered, though the
results in each case prove to be similar. By way of exemplifying these
methods he enters in great detail into certain vase-subjects, their
method of treatment on vases of the different periods, and their
approximation to the text. Thus, the funeral games for Patroklos (_Il._
xxiii.) are depicted on the François vase (see p. 11) with marked
deviations from Homer’s narrative; and not only this, but without
characterisation, so that if the performers were not named the subject
could hardly have been identified. To note one small point, all Homeric
races took place in two-horse chariots (_bigae_), but on B.F. vases
four-horse _quadrigae_ are almost invariably found.[18]

Subjects of a more conventional character, such as battle scenes,
farewell scenes, or the arming of a warrior, present even more
difficulty. Even when names occur it is only increased. We must assume
that the vase-painter fixed on typical names for his personages,
without caring whether he had literary authority. In some cases the
_genre_ scenes seem to be developed from heroic originals, in others
the contrary appears to be the case.[19] It is not, however, unfair to
say that the Epos was the vase-painter’s “source.” The only doubtful
question is the _extent_ of his inspiration; and, at all events, it was
a _source_ in the sense that no other Greek literature was until we
come to the fourth century.

Turning now to the consideration of later literature,[20] we find in
Hesiod a certain parallelism of theme to the vases, but little trace of
actual influence. Indirectly he may have affected the vase-painter by
his crystallisation of Greek mythology in the Theogony, where he
establishes the number of the Muses (l. 77), and also the names of the
Nereids.[21] It is, however, interesting to note the Hesiodic themes
which were also popular with the vase-painters: the creation of
Pandora; the fights of Herakles and Kyknos, and of Lapiths and
Centaurs, and the pursuit of Perseus by the Gorgons; the contest of
Zeus with Typhoeus (or Typhon); and the birth of Athena.[22]

The influence of lyric poetry was even slighter. Somewhat idealised
figures of some of the Greek lyrists appear on R.F. vases, such as
Sappho and Anakreon (see p. 152); but this is all. In regard to Pindar
and Bacchylides, the idealising and heroising tendencies of the age may
be compared with the contemporary tendency of vase-paintings, and the
latter may often be found useful to compare with—if not exactly to
illustrate—the legends which the two poets commemorate. For instance,
in the ode of Bacchylides in which he describes the fate of Kroisos,
there is a curious deviation from the familiar Herodotean version, the
king being represented as voluntarily sacrificing himself.[23] The only
vase-painting dealing with this subject (Fig. 132, p. 150) apparently
reproduces this tradition.

With the influence of the stage we have already dealt elsewhere.[24]
With the exception of the Satyric drama, it can hardly be said to have
made itself felt, except in the vases of Southern Italy, in the fourth
century B.C., but indications of the Satyric influence may be traced in
many R.F. Attic vases, no doubt owing to their connection with the
popular Dionysiac subjects. On a vase in Naples[25] are represented
preparations for a Satyric drama. When we reach the time of tragic and
comic influence, we not only find the subjects reproduced, but even
their stage setting; in other words, the vases are not so much intended
to illustrate the written as the acted play, just as it was performed.

The whole question is admirably summed up by Luckenbach[26] in the
following manner: (1) The Epos is the chief source of all
vase-paintings from the earliest time to the decadence inclusive, and
next comes Tragedy, as regards the later vases only; of the influence
of other poetry on the formation of myths in vase-paintings there is no
established example. (2) _Vase-paintings are not illustrations_, either
of the Epos or of the Drama, and there is no intention of reproducing a
story accurately; hence great discrepancies and rarity of close
adherence to literary forms; but the salient features of the story are
preserved. (3) Discrepancies in the naming of personages are partly
arbitrary, partly due to ignorance; the extension of scenes by means of
rows of bystanders, meaningless, but thought to be appropriate, is of
course a development of the artist’s, conditioned by exigencies of
space. Anachronisms on vases are of frequent occurrence. (4) Such
scenes as those of warriors arming or departing are always the
painter’s own invention, ordinary scenes being often “heroised” by the
addition of names. But individuals are not necessarily all or always to
be named; and, again, the artist often gives names without
individualising the figures. (5) In the archaic period successive
movements of time are often very naïvely blended (see p. 10); the
difference between art and literature is most marked in scenes where a
definite moment is not indicated. (6) Vase-paintings often give a
general survey of a poem, the scene not being drawn from one particular
passage or episode. The features of one poem are in art sometimes
transferred to another.

The attention that has been paid now for many years to collecting,
assorting, and critically discussing the material afforded by the vases
has much diminished the difficulties of this most puzzling branch of
archaeology. It has been chiefly lightened by the discovery from time
to time of inscribed vases, though, as has just been noted, even these
must be treated with caution; and even now, of course, there are
numerous subjects the interpretation of which is either disputed or
purely hypothetical. But we can at least pride ourselves on having
advanced many degrees beyond the labours of early writers on the
subject, down to the year 1850.

When painted vases first began to be discovered in Southern Italy, the
subjects were supposed to relate universally to the Eleusinian or
Dionysiac mysteries, and this school of interpretation for a long time
found favour in some quarters, even in the days of Gerhard and De
Witte. But it was obvious from the first that such interpretations did
not carry the investigator very far, and even in the eighteenth century
other systems arose, such as that of Italynski, who regarded the
subjects as of historical import.[27] Subsequently Panofka endeavoured
to trace a connection between the subjects and the names of artists or
other persons recorded on the vases, or, again, between the subjects
and shapes. The latter idea, of course, contained a measure of truth,
as is seen in many instances[28]; but it was, of course, impossible to
follow out either this or the other hypothesis in any detail.

The foundations of the more scientific and rational school of
interpretation were laid as early as the days of Winckelmann, and he
was followed by Lanzi, Visconti, and Millingen, and finally Otto Jahn,
who, as we have seen, practically revolutionised the study of
ceramography. Of late, however, the question of the interpretation of
subjects has been somewhat relegated to the background, owing to the
overwhelming interest evoked by the finds of early fabrics or by the
efforts of German and other scholars to distinguish the various schools
of painting in the finest period.

Millingen, in the Introduction to his _Vases Grecs_, drew up a
classification of the subjects on vases which need not be detailed
here, but which, with some modifications, may be regarded as holding
good to the present day. He distinguishes ten classes, the first three
mythological, the next four dealing with daily life, and the three last
with purely decorative ornamentation. A somewhat similar order is
adopted by Müller in his _Handbuch_, by Gerhard in his _Auserlesene
Vasenbilder_, and by Jahn in his Introduction to the Munich Catalogue
(p. cc ff.). In the present and following chapters the arrangement and
classification of the subjects adhere in the main to the system laid
down by these writers; and as the order is not, of course,
chronological in regard to style, reference has been made where
necessary to differences of epoch and fabric.[29] It may be convenient
to recapitulate briefly the main headings under which the subjects are
grouped.

    I. The Olympian deities and divine beings in immediate connection
      with them, such as Eros and marine deities.

        (_a_) In general; (_b_) individually. (Chapter XII.)

   II. Dionysos and his cycle, Pan, Satyrs, and Maenads. (Page 54 ff.)

  III. Chthonian and cosmogonic deities, personifications, and minor
      deities in general. (Page 66 ff.)

   IV. Heroic legends and mythology in general.

    (_a_) Herakles; (_b_) Theseus, Perseus, and other heroes; (_c_)
      local or obscure myths; (_d_) the Theban and Trojan stories;
      (_e_) monsters. (Chapter XIV.)

    V. Historical subjects. (Page 149 ff.)

   VI. Scenes from daily life and miscellaneous subjects (for detailed
      classification see p. 154). (Chapter XV.)

The number of subjects to be found on any one vase is of course usually
limited to one, two, or at most three, according to the shape. Usually
when there is more than one the subjects are quite distinct from one
another; though attempts have been made in some cases, as in the B.F.
amphorae, to trace a connection.[30] On the other hand, the R.F.
kylikes of the strong period often show a unity of subject running
through the interior and exterior scenes, whether the theme is
mythological or ordinary.[31] It was only in exceptional cases that an
artist could devote his efforts to producing an entire subject, as on
some of the large kylikes with the labours of Theseus,[32] or the vases
representing the sack of Troy.[33] The great François vase in Florence
is a striking example of a mythology in miniature, containing as it
does more than one subject treated in the fullest detail. And here
reference may be made to the main principles which governed the method
of telling a story in ancient art, and prevailed at different
periods.[34] The earliest and most simple is the _continuous_ method,
which represents several scenes together as if taking place
simultaneously, although successive in point of time. This method was
often employed in Oriental art, but is not found in Hellenic times; it
was, however, revived by the Romans under the Empire, and prevailed all
through the early stages of Christian art. Secondly, there is the
_complementary_ method, which aims at the complete expression of
everything relating to the central event. The same figures are not in
this case necessarily repeated, but others are introduced to express
the action of the different subjects, all being collected in one space
without regard to time, as in the continuous style. This is of Oriental
origin, and is first seen in the description of Achilles’ shield; it is
also well illustrated in the François vase, in the story of Troilos.
Here the death of Troilos is not indeed actually depicted, but the
events leading up to it (the water-drawing at the fountain and the
pursuit by Achilles) and those consequent on it (the announcement of
the murder to Priam and the setting forth of Hector to avenge it) are
all represented without the repetition of any figures. Lastly, there is
the _isolating_ method, which is purely Hellenic, being developed from
the complementary. This is best illustrated by the Theseus kylikes,
with their groups of the labours, which, it should be remembered, are
not continuous episodes in one story, but single events separated in
time and space, and collected together with a sort of superficial
resemblance to the other methods.

Some description of the François vase has been given elsewhere (Vol. I.
p. 370)[35]; but as it is unique in its comprehensiveness, and as a
typical presentation of the subjects most popular at the time when
vase-painters had just begun to pay special attention to mythology, it
may be worth while to recapitulate its contents here. The subjects are
no less than eleven in number, arranged in six horizontal friezes, with
figures also on the handles, and there are in all 115 inscriptions
explaining the names of the personages and even of objects (_e.g._
?d??a, for the broken pitcher of Polyxena). Eight of these subjects
belong to the region of mythology:—(1) On the neck: the hunt of the
Calydonian boar, and (2) the landing of Theseus and Ariadne at Naxos,
accompanied by dancing youths and maidens. (3) On the shoulder: chariot
race at the funeral games of Patroklos, and (4) combat of Centaurs and
Lapiths (with Theseus). (5) On the body: the marriage of Peleus and
Thetis, attended by the gods in procession. (6) On the body: the death
of Troilos (see above), and (7) the return of Hephaistos to Olympos.
(8) On each of the handles, Ajax with the body of Achilles. On the flat
top of the lip is represented (9) a combat of pigmies and cranes; on
either side of the foot (10) a lion and a panther devouring a bull and
stag, Gryphons, Sphinxes, and other animals; and on the upper part of
the handles (11) Gorgons and figures of the Asiatic Artemis (see p. 35)
holding wild animals by the neck.

                  *       *       *       *       *

It is, of course, impossible to indicate all the subjects on the
thousands of painted vases in existence; and it must also be remembered
that many are of disputed meaning. The succeeding review must therefore
only be considered as a general summary which aims at omitting nothing
of any interest and avoiding as far as possible useless repetition. In
the references appended under each subject the principle has been
adopted of making them as far as possible representative of all
periods, and also of selecting the most typical and artistic examples,
as well as the most accessible, publications.[36]

In dealing with the subjects depicted on Greek vases, we naturally
regard the Olympian deities as having the preeminence. We will
therefore begin by considering such scenes as have reference to actions
in which those deities were engaged, and, secondly, representations of
general groups of deities, either as spectators of terrestrial events
or without any particular signification. It will then be convenient to
deal with the several deities one by one, noting the subjects with
which each is individually connected. We shall in the following chapter
proceed to consider the subordinate deities, such as those of the
under-world and the Dionysiac cycle, and personifications of nature and
abstract ideas. Chapter XIV. will be devoted to the consideration of
heroic legends, mythological beings, and historical subjects; and in
Chapter XV. will be discussed all such subjects as relate to the daily
life of the Greeks.

                          THE OLYMPIAN DEITIES

One of the oldest and most continuously popular subjects is the
=Gigantomachia=, or Battle of the Gods and Giants, which forms part of
the Titanic and pre-heroic cosmogony, and may therefore take precedence
of the rest. The Aloadae (Otos and Ephialtes), strictly speaking, are
connected with a different event—the attack on Olympos and chaining of
Ares; but the scenes in which they occur are so closely linked with the
Gigantomachy proper that it is unnecessary to differentiate them. We
also find as a single subject the combat of Zeus with the snake-footed
Typhon.[37]

The _locus classicus_ of Greek art for the Gigantomachia is of course
the frieze of the great altar at Pergamon (197 B.C.), but several vases
bear representations almost as complete, though it is not as a rule
possible to identify the giants except where their names are
inscribed.[38] Most vases give only one to three pairs of combatants.

[Illustration: FIG. 111. GIGANTOMACHIA, FROM IONIC VASE IN LOUVRE.]

Some pairs are found almost exclusively together, _e.g._ Athena and
Enkelados, or Ares and Mimas; Artemis and Apollo are generally opposed
to the Aloadae Otos and Ephialtes, Zeus to Porphyrion, and Poseidon to
Polybotes (Fig. 112) or Ephialtes. Hestia alone, the “stay-at-home”
goddess of the hearth, is never found in these scenes, but Dionysos,
Herakles, and the Dioskuri all take their part in aiding the Olympian
deities. Zeus hurls his thunderbolts[39]; Poseidon is usually depicted
with his trident, or hurling the island of Nisyros (indicated as a rock
with animals painted on it) upon his adversary[40]; Hephaistos uses a
pair of tongs with a burning coal in them as his weapon[41]; and
Dionysos is in some cases aided by his panther.[42] Aeolus occurs once
with his bag of winds.[43]

[Illustration: FIG. 112. POSEIDON AND THE GIANT POLYBOTES, FROM THE
KYLIX IN BERLIN.]

The following groups can be identified on vases by inscriptions or
details of treatment:—

 Zeus and Agasthenes, Hyperbios, and Ephialtes: Louvre E 732 (Fig. 111).
 Zeus and Porphyrion: Berlin 2531.
 Hera and Harpolykos: Louvre E 732.
 Hera and Rhoitos (miswritten Phoitos): Berlin 2531.
 Poseidon and Polybotes: Louvre E 732; Berlin 2531 = Fig. 112.
 Poseidon and Ephialtes: Reinach, ii. 188.
 Apollo and Ephialtes: Berlin 2531.
 Artemis and Otos: Reinach, ii. 164.
 Artemis and Aigaion: Berlin 2531.
 Hephaistos and Euryalos: B.M. E 47.
 Hephaistos and Klytios: Berlin 2293.
 Athena and Enkelados: B.M. B 252; Louvre E 732; _Él. Cér._ i. 8.
 Ares and Mimas: Berlin 2531; B.M. B 617.
 Hermes and Hippolytos: Berlin 2293.
 Hermes and Polybios (?): Louvre E 732.
 Dionysos and Eurymedon: _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ xx. pl. 7.
 Athena with arm of Akratos: Berlin 2957 = _Él. Cér._ i. 88.
 Death of Otos (supposed): Bibl. Nat. 299 = Reinach, ii. 255.

Among scenes supposed to take place in Olympos, the most important is
the =Birth of Athena= from the head of Zeus.[44] Usually she is
represented as a diminutive figure actually emerging from his head, but
in one or two instances she stands before him fully developed,[45] as
was probably the case in the centre of the east pediment of the
Parthenon. This subject is commoner on B.F. vases, and does not appear
at all after the middle of the fifth century.[46] In most cases several
of the Olympian deities are spectators of the scene; sometimes
Hephaistos wields his axe or runs away in terror at the result of his
operations[47]; in others the Eileithyiae or goddesses of child-birth
lend their assistance.[48] On a R.F. vase in the Bibliothèque Nationale
Athena flies out backwards from Zeus’ head.[49]

In accordance with a principle already discussed (Vol. I. p. 378), the
composition or “type” of this subject is sometimes adopted on B.F.
vases for other groups of figures, where the absence of Athena shows
clearly that the birth scene is not intended, and no particular meaning
can be assigned to the composition.[50]

Representations of the =Marriage of Zeus and Hera= cannot be pointed to
with certainty in vase-paintings. On B.F. vases we sometimes see a
bridal pair in a chariot accompanied by various deities, or figures
with the attributes of divinities[51]; but the chief figures are not in
any way characterised as such, and it is better to regard these scenes
as idealisations of ordinary marriage processions. On the other hand,
there are undoubted representations of Zeus and Hera enthroned among
the Olympian deities or partaking of a banquet.[52]

[Illustration: FIG. 113. THE BIRTH OF ATHENA (BRIT. MUS. B 244).]

The story of the enchaining of Hera in a magic chair by Hephaistos, and
her subsequent liberation by him, is alluded to on many vases, though
one episode is more prominent than the others. Of the expulsion of
Hephaistos from heaven we find no instance, and of the release of Hera
there is only one doubtful example[53]; but we find a parody of the
former’s combat with Ares, who forces him to liberate Hera.[54] The
episode most frequent is that of the =return of Hephaistos= in a
drunken condition to Olympos, conducted by Dionysos and a crowd of
Satyrs; of this there are fine examples on vases of all periods.[55] On
earlier vases Hephaistos rides a mule; on the later he generally
stumbles along, leaning on Dionysos or a Satyr for support.

On the François vase we see Zeus and Hera, with an attendant train of
deities, Nymphs, and Muses, going in a chariot to the nuptials of
Peleus and Thetis; on many vases we have the reception of the deified
Herakles among the gods of Olympos[56]; and on others groups of deities
banqueting or without particular signification.[57] But on the late
Apulian vases it is a frequent occurrence to find an upper row of
deities as spectators of some event taking place just below: thus they
watch battles of Greeks and Persians,[58] or such scenes as the
contract between Pelops and Oinomaos,[59] the madness of Lykourgos,[60]
the death of Hippolytos,[61] and others from heroic legend, which it is
unnecessary to specify here; only a few typical ones can be
mentioned.[62] They also appear as spectators of scenes in or relating
to the nether-world.[63]

                  *       *       *       *       *

=Zeus= appears less frequently than some deities, and seldom alone; but
still there are many myths connected with him, besides those already
discussed. As a single figure he appears enthroned and attended by his
eagle on a Cyrenaic cup in the Louvre[64]; or again in his chariot,
hurling a thunderbolt[65]; in company with his brother-gods of the
ocean and under-world, Poseidon and Hades, he is seen on a kylix by
Xenokles.[66] He is also found with Athena,[67] with Hera, Apollo,
Artemis, Aphrodite, and Hermes[68]; and frequently with Herakles at the
latter’s reception into heaven.[69] In one instance he settles a
dispute between Aphrodite and Persephone.[70] He receives libations
from Nike,[71] or performs the ceremony himself, attended by Hera,
Iris, and Nike,[72] and is also attended by Hebe and Ganymede as
cupbearers.[73] His statue, especially that of ?e?? ???e??? at Troy,
sometimes gives local colour to a scene.[74]

Most of the scenes in which he appears relate to his various love
adventures, among which the legends of Europa, Io, and Semele are the
most conspicuous; but first of his numerous _amours_ should perhaps be
mentioned his wooing of his consort Hera. He carries her off while
asleep from her nurse in Euboea,[75] and also appears to her in the
form of a cuckoo.[76] The rape of Ganymede by his eagle appears once or
twice on vases,[77] but more generally Zeus himself seizes the youth
while he is engaged in bowling a hoop or otherwise at play.[78] On a
fine late vase with Latin inscriptions Ganymede appears in Olympos,[79]
and he is also depicted as a shepherd.[80]

Semele Zeus pursues and slays with the thunderbolt[81]; the birth of
her son Dionysos from his thigh is represented but rarely on vases, and
is liable to confusion with other subjects. This story falls into three
episodes: (1) the reception of the infant by Hermes from Dirke, in
order to be sewn into Zeus’ thigh[82]; (2) the actual birth scene[83];
(3) the handing over of the child to the Nymphs.[84] Of his visit to
Alkmena there are no certain representations, but two comic scenes on
South Italian vases[85] may possibly refer to it, and one of them at
least seems to be influenced by the burlesque by Rhinton, from which
Plautus borrowed the idea of his _Amphitruo_. The apotheosis of
Alkmena, when her husband places her on a funeral pyre after
discovering her misdeed, is represented on two fine South Italian vases
in the British Museum; in one case Zeus looks on.[86] His appearing to
Leda in the form of a swan only seems to find one illustration on a
vase, but in one case he is present at the scene of Leda with the
egg.[87]

He is also depicted descending in a shower of gold on Danaë[88]; or as
carrying off the Nymphs Aegina and Thaleia[89]; or, again, with an
unknown Nymph, perhaps Taygeta.[90] In the form of a bull, on which
Europa rides, he provides a very favourite subject, of which some fine
specimens exist.[91] One variation of the type is found on an Apulian
vase, where Europa advances to caress the bull sent by Zeus to fetch
her.[92] The story of Io[93] resolves itself into several scenes, all
of which find illustration on the vases: (1) the meeting of Io and Zeus
when she rests at the shrine of Artemis after her wanderings[94]; (2)
Io in the form of a cow, guarded by Argos[95]; (3) the appearance of
her deliverer Hermes[96]; (4) Hermes attacks and slays Argos (Fig.
114).[97]

[Illustration:

  From _Wiener Vorlegeblätter_.

  FIG. 114. HERMES SLAYING ARGOS IN PRESENCE OF ZEUS (VASE AT VIENNA).]
]

In addition, the presence of Zeus may be noted in various scenes from
heroic or other legends, which are more appropriately discussed under
other headings[98], such as the freeing of Prometheus[99], the combat
of Herakles and Kyknos[100], or the weighing of the souls of Achilles
and Hector[101]; at the sending of Triptolemos, the flaying of Marsyas,
the death of Aktaeon, and that of Archemoros[102]; at the creation of
Pandora and the Judgment of Paris[103]; the rape of the Delphic tripod
and that of the Leukippidae, at Peleus’ seizing of Thetis,[104] and
with Idas and Marpessa.[105] The story of the golden dog of Zeus, which
was stolen by Pandareos, is referred to under a later heading.[106]

                  *       *       *       *       *

=Hera= apart from Zeus appears but seldom, but there are a few scenes
in which she is found alone; of those in which she is an actor or
spectator some have been already described, the most important being
the story of Hephaistos’ return to heaven.[107] As her figure is not
always strongly characterised by means of attributes, it is not always
to be identified with certainty. As a single figure she forms the
interior decoration of one fine R.F. kylix,[108] and her ??a???, or
primitive cult-idol, is sometimes found as an indication of the scene
of an action.[109] On one vase she is represented at her toilet.[110]

There is a vase-painting which represents Hera on her throne offering a
libation to Prometheus, an aged figure who stands before her.[111] She
is also present at the liberation of Prometheus[112]; in a scene
probably intended for the punishment of Ixion[113]; at the creation of
Pandora[114]; and in scenes from the story of Io.[115] She suckles the
child Herakles in one instance,[116] and in another appears with him in
the garden of the Hesperides[117]; she is also present at his
reconciliation with Apollo at Delphi,[118] and at his apotheosis,[119]
receiving him and Iolaos.[120] On an early Ionic vase she appears
contending with him in the presence of Athena and Poseidon, and wears a
goat-skin head-dress, as in the Roman type of Juno Sospita or
Lanuvina.[121]

The scene in which she appears most frequently is the Judgment of Paris
(see below, p. 122); she is also present at the birth of Dionysos[122];
at the stealing of Zeus’ golden dog by Pandareos[123]; at the contest
between Apollo and Marsyas[124]; at the slaughter of the Niobids[125];
and with Perseus and Athena.[126]

She appears sometimes with Hebe, Iris, and Nike, from whom she receives
libations[127]; and in one scene, apparently from a Satyric drama, she
and Iris are attacked by a band of Seileni and rescued by Herakles.[128]

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:

  From _Ant. Denkm._

  FIG. 115. POSEIDON AND AMPHITRITE ON A CORINTHIAN PINAX.
]

=Poseidon= is a figure somewhat rare in archaic art as a whole,
especially in statuary, but is more frequently seen on vases, mostly in
groups of deities, or as a spectator of events taking place in or under
the sea, his domain. Among subjects already discussed, he is present at
the birth of Athena,[129] at the nuptials of Zeus and Hera,[130] and in
assemblies of the Olympian gods, generally with his consort
Amphitrite[131]; he also takes part in the Gigantomachia and the
reception of Herakles into Olympos.[132] He is represented in a group
with his brother deities of the higher and nether world, Zeus and
Hades[133]; with Apollo, Athena, Ares, and Hermes[134]; among the
Eleusinian deities at the sending forth of Triptolemos[135]; and
occasionally in Dionysiac scenes as a companion of the wine-god.[136]
As a single figure he is frequently found on the series of archaic
tablets or _pinakes_ found near Corinth, and also in company with
Amphitrite (Fig. 115)[137]; on later vases not so frequently.[138] In
one instance he rides on a bull,[139] in others on a horse, sometimes
winged[140]; elsewhere he drives in a chariot with Amphitrite and other
deities[141]; he watches the Sun-god in his car rising out of the
waves[142]; and one vase has the curious subject of Poseidon, Herakles,
and Hermes engaged in fishing.[143]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                                 PLATE L

[Illustration:

  From _Baumeister_.

  ATHENA AND POSEIDON CONTENDING FOR ATTICA; VASE FROM KERTCH (AT
    PETERSBURG).
]

         ------------------------------------------------------

Among scenes in which he plays an active part the most interesting is
the dispute with Athena for the ownership of Attica, also represented
on the west pediment of the Parthenon[144]; his love adventures,
especially his pursuit of Amymone[145] and Aithra,[146] are common
subjects, but in many cases the object of his pursuit cannot be
identified.[147] He receives Theseus under the ocean,[148] and possibly
in one case Glaukos, on his acceptance as a sea-god[149]; he is also
present at the former’s recognition by Aigeus.[150] He is seen at the
death of Talos,[151] and with Europa crossing the sea.[152] In
conjunction with other deities, chiefly on late Italian vases, he is
present as a spectator of various episodes, such as the adventures of
Bellerophon, Kadmos, or Pelops, the rape of Persephone, the creation of
Pandora, the death of Hippolytos, and in one historical scene, a battle
of Greeks and Persians.[153] He superintends several of the adventures
of Herakles, notably those in which he is specially interested, as the
contests with Antaios and Triton[154]; and he supports Hera in her
combat with that hero.[155] He is also seen with Perseus on his way to
slay Medusa,[156] and among the Gorgons after that event.[157]

                  *       *       *       *       *

In connection with Poseidon it may be convenient to mention here other
divinities and beings with marine associations—such as Okeanos, Nereus,
and Triton, and the Nereids or sea-nymphs, daughters of Nereus, with
the more rarely occurring Naiads. Of these the name of Okeanos occurs
but once, on the François vase. The figure itself has disappeared, but
the marine monster on which he rides to the wedding of Peleus and
Thetis, and the inscription, remain. =Nereus= appears as a single
figure, with fish-tail and trident,[158] but is most frequently met
with in connection with the capture of his daughter Thetis by Peleus,
either as a spectator or receiving the news from a Nereid.[159] He also
watches the contest of Herakles with Triton,[160] himself encountering
the hero in some cases.[161] On one vase Herakles has seized his
trident and threatens him by making havoc of his belongings.[162] He
appears at Herakles’ combat with Kyknos,[163] and at his
apotheosis,[164] and also offers a crown to Achilles.[165] In one case
he is found in Dionysos’ company.[166] With his daughter Doris he
watches the pursuit of another Nereid by Poseidon.[167]

=Triton= is found as a single figure,[168] and (chiefly on B.F. vases)
engaged in a struggle with Herakles.[169] He also carries Theseus
through the sea to Poseidon,[170] and watches the flight of Phrixos and
Helle over the sea.[171] The group of deities represented by Ino and
Leukothea, Palaimon, Melikertes, and Glaukos appear in isolated
instances,[172] as do Proteus[173] and Skylla[174]—the latter as single
figures, without reference to their connection with the _Odyssey_. A
monstrous unidentified figure, with wings and a serpentine fish-tail,
which may be a sea-deity (in one case feminine), is found on some early
Corinthian vases[175]; possibly Palaimon is intended.

=The Nereids=, who are often distinctively named, are sometimes found
in groups,[176] especially watching the seizure of Thetis or bearing
the news to Nereus[177]; or, again, carrying the armour of Achilles
over the sea and presenting it to him.[178] On one vase they mourn over
the dead Achilles.[179] They are also present at the reception of
Theseus,[180] the contest of Herakles and Triton,[181] and with Europa
on the bull.[182] Kymothea offers a parting cup to Achilles[183]; the
Naiads, who are similar beings, present to Perseus the cap, sword,
shoes, and wallet.[184] They are also found grouped with various
deities,[185] and even one in the under-world.[186] Thetis appears once
as a single figure, accompanied by dolphins[187]; for her capture by
Peleus and relations with Achilles, see p. 120 ff.

                  *       *       *       *       *

=The Eleusinian deities= Demeter and Persephone (or Kore) are usually
found together, not only in scenes which have a special reference to
their cult, but in general assemblies of the gods. They once appear in
the Gigantomachia.[188] Scenes which refer to the Eleusinian cycle are
found exclusively on later examples,[189] and as a rule merely
represent the two chief deities grouped with others, such as Dionysos
and Hekate, and with their attendants, Iacchos, Eumolpos, and
Eubouleus.[190] One vase represents the initiation of Herakles, Kastor,
and Polydeukes in the Lesser Mysteries of Agra[191]; another, the birth
of Ploutos, who is handed to Demeter in a cornucopia by Gaia, rising
from the earth, in the presence of Persephone, Triptolemos, and
Iacchos[192]; and others, the birth of Dionysos or Iacchos—a very
similar composition.[193] Demeter and Persephone are represented
driving in their chariot, with attendant deities and other
figures,[194] or standing alone, carrying sceptre and torches
respectively,[195] or pouring libations at a tomb (on a sepulchral
vase).[196] They are present at the carrying off of Basile by Echelos
(a rare Attic legend),[197] and Demeter alone is seen, once at the
birth of Athena,[198] once at the slaughter of the dragon by
Kadmos,[199] once enthroned,[200] and once with Dionysos as
Thesmophoros, holding an open roll with the laws (?esµ??) of her
cult.[201]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                                PLATE LI

[Illustration: KOTYLE BY HIERON: TRIPTOLEMOS AT ELEUSIS (BRITISH
MUSEUM).]

         ------------------------------------------------------

Closely connected with Eleusis is the subject of the sending forth of
_Triptolemos_ as a teacher of agriculture in his winged car. This is
found on vases of all periods,[202] but is best exemplified on the
beautiful kotyle of Hieron in the British Museum (Plate LI.), where,
besides Olympian and Chthonian deities, the personification of Eleusis
is present. Besides the other Eleusinian personages, Keleos and
Hippothoon are also seen.[203] Triptolemos is generally seated in his
car, but in one or two cases he stands beside it[204]; in another he is
just mounting it.[205] On the latter vase Persephone holds his plough.
On a vase in Berlin Triptolemos appears without his car, holding a
ploughshare; Demeter presents him with ears of corn, and Persephone
holds torches.[206]

=Persephone= is also seen with Iacchos,[207] who, according to various
accounts, was her son or brother. She appears with Aphrodite and
Adonis,[208] and one vase is supposed to represent the dispute between
her and Aphrodite over the latter, which was appeased by Zeus.[209]

The story of the rape of Persephone by Hades, her sojourn in the
under-world, and her return to earth is also chiefly confined to the
later vases, especially the incident of the rape.[210] In the elaborate
representations of the under-world on late Apulian vases she generally
stands or sits with Hades in a building in the centre.[211] She is
often depicted in scenes representing the carrying off of Kerberos by
Herakles,[212] or banqueting with Hades.[213] On both early and late
vases Hermes, in his character of Psychopompos, is seen preparing to
conduct her back from the nether world (see Plate XLV.),[214] or
actually on his way.[215] In another semi-mystical version of the
return of Persephone, signifying the return of spring and vegetation,
her head or part of her body emerges from the earth,[216] in one case
accompanied by the head of Dionysos, whereat Satyrs and Maenads flee
affrighted.[217] The interpretation of some of these scenes, however,
has been much questioned.[218]

                  *       *       *       *       *

The number of vases with subjects representing the three Delphic
deities—=Apollo=, =Artemis=, and =Leto=—is considerable. The
appearances of Apollo, at any rate, are probably only exceeded in
number by those of Athena, Dionysos, and Herakles. It is, in fact,
impossible to make a complete enumeration of the groups in which Apollo
occurs, and a general outline alone can be given.[219]

Apollo as a single figure is often found both on B.F. and R.F. vases,
usually as Kitharoidos, playing his lyre; sometimes also he is
distinguished by his bow.[220] As Kitharoidos he is usually represented
standing,[221] but in some cases is seated.[222] He is sometimes
accompanied by a hind[223] or a bull (Apollo Nomios?).[224] He is
represented at Delphi seated on the Pythoness’ tripod,[225] or is
seated at an altar,[226] or pours a libation.[227] He rides on a
swan[228] or on a Gryphon,[229] and also crosses the sea on a
tripod.[230] In some scenes he is characterised as Daphnephoros,[231]
holding a branch of laurel, or is represented in the attitude
associated with Apollo Lykeios, resting with one hand above his
head.[232] In one scene the type of Apollo Kitharoidos closely
resembles that associated with the sculptor Skopas.[233]

[Illustration:

  From _Mon. dell’ Inst._ ix.
  FIG. 116. APOLLO, ARTEMIS, AND LETO.
]

When he is grouped with Artemis, the latter deity usually carries a bow
and quiver,[234] or they pour libations to one another;[235] but more
commonly they stand together, without engaging in any action. They are
also depicted in a chariot.[236] More numerous are the scenes in which
Leto is also included (as Fig. 116), though she is not always to be
identified with certainty.[237] In this connection may be noted certain
scenes relating to Apollo’s childhood: his birth is once
represented,[238] and on certain B.F. vases a woman is seen nursing two
children (one painted black, the other white), which may denote Leto
with her infants, though it is more probably a symbolic representation
of Earth the Nursing-mother (Gaia Kourotrophos; see p. 73).[239]
Tischbein published a vase of doubtful authenticity, which represents
Leto with the twins fleeing from the serpent Python at Delos[240]; but
in two instances Apollo certainly appears in Leto’s arms, in one case
shooting the Python with his bow.[241]

With these three is sometimes joined Hermes—in one instance at Delphi,
as indicated by the presence of the _omphalos_[242]; or, again, Hermes
appears with Apollo alone, or with Apollo and Artemis.[243] Poseidon is
seen with Apollo, generally accompanied by Artemis and Hermes, also by
Leto and other indeterminate female figures.[244] In conjunction with
Athena, Apollo is found grouped with Hermes, Dionysos, Nike, and other
female figures; also with Herakles.[245] With Aphrodite he is seen in
toilet scenes, sometimes anointed by Eros.[246] In one case they are
accompanied by Artemis and Hermes,[247] and on one vase Apollo is
grouped with Zeus and with Aphrodite on her swan.[248] He accompanies
the chariots of various deities, such as Poseidon, Demeter, and
Athena,[249] especially when the latter conducts Herakles to
heaven.[250]

Apollo, in one case, is associated with the local Nymph Kyrene on a
fragment of a vase probably made in that colony.[251] He frequently
receives libations from Nike,[252] and in one case is crowned by
her.[253] With Nymphs and female figures of indeterminate character he
occurs on many (chiefly B.F.) vases, sometimes as receiving a
libation.[254] On several red-figured vases he is accompanied by some
or all of the nine Muses, one representing their contest with Thamyris
and Sappho.[255] He and Artemis are specially associated with marriage
processions, whether of Zeus and Hera or of ordinary bridal
couples.[256] Apollo also appears in a chariot drawn by a boar and a
lion at the marriage of Kadmos and Harmonia.[257]

In Dionysiac scenes he is a frequent spectator[258]; he greets Dionysos
among his thiasos,[259] joins him in a banquet,[260] or accompanies
Ariadne’s chariot[261] or the returning Hephaistos[262]; listens to the
Satyr Molkos playing the flutes,[263] or is grouped with Satyrs and
Maenads at Nysa.[264] More important and of greater interest are the
scenes which depict the legend of Marsyas, and they may fitly find a
place here. The story is told in eight different episodes on the vases,
which may be thus systematised:

  1. Marsyas picks up the flutes dropped by Athena: Berlin 2418 =
      Baumeister, ii. p. 1001, fig. 1209: cf. Reinach, i. 342 (in
      Boston).

  2. First meeting of Apollo and Marsyas: Millin-Reinach, i. 6.

  3. The challenge: Berlin 2638.

  4. Marsyas performing: B.M. E 490; Reinach, i. 452 (Berlin 2950), i.
      511 (Athens 1921), ii. 312; Jatta 1093 = Reinach, i. 175 =
      Baumeister, ii. p. 891, fig. 965.

  5. Apollo performing: Jatta 1364 = _Él. Cér._ ii. 63; _Wiener Vorl._
      vi. 11.

  6. Apollo victorious: Reinach, ii. 310; Petersburg 355 = Reinach, i.
      14 = _Wiener Vorl._ iii. 5.

  7. Condemnation of Marsyas: Naples 3231 = Reinach, i. 405; Reinach,
      ii. 324.

  8. Flaying of Marsyas: Naples 2991 = Reinach, i. 406 (a vase with
      reliefs); Roscher, ii. 2455 = _Él. Cér._ ii. 64.

Among other scenes in which Apollo (generally accompanied by Artemis)
plays a personal part, the following may be mentioned: the slaying of
the Niobids by the two deities[265]; the slaying of Tityos by
Apollo[266] (in one case Tityos is represented carrying off Leto, who
is rescued by Apollo)[267]; and various love adventures in which Apollo
is concerned.[268] The name of the Nymph pursued by him in the latter
scenes cannot, as a rule, be identified; one vase appears to represent
him contending with Idas for the possession of Marpessa.[269] He also
heals the Centaur Cheiron (this appears in burlesque form),[270] and
protects Creusa from the wrath of Ion.[271] He is seen seeking for the
cattle stolen from him by Hermes, and contending with that god over the
lyre.[272] He frequently appears in Birth of Athena scenes as
Kitharoidos,[273] and also at the sending forth of Triptolemos[274] or
in the under-world.[275] In one case he appears (with Athena, Artemis,
and Herakles) as protecting deity of Attica, watching a combat of
Greeks and Amazons.[276] On one vase there is a possible reference to
Apollo Smintheus, with whom the mouse was especially associated.[277]

Like other deities, Apollo and Artemis are frequently found on Apulian
vases as spectators of the deeds of heroes, or other events in which
they are more or less interested; some of these subjects have already
been specified (see above, p. 17). Apollo especially is often seen in
connection with the story of Herakles, or the Theban and Trojan
legends. One burlesque scene represents his carrying off the bow of
Herakles to the roof of the Delphic temple,[278] and the subject of the
capture of the tripod, with the subsequent reconciliation, is of very
frequent occurrence.[279] As Apollo Ismenios, the patron of Thebes, he
is a spectator of the scene of the infant Herakles strangling the
snakes[280]; in one case he is represented disputing with Herakles over
a stag,[281] which may be another version of the story of the Keryneian
stag, a scene in which he also occurs.[282] He is seen with Herakles
and Kyknos,[283] Herakles and Kerberos,[284] and is very frequently
present at the apotheosis of the hero.[285]

Apollo and Artemis watch Kadmos slaying the dragon,[286] and one or
other of them is present at the liberating of Prometheus[287]; Apollo
alone is seen with Oedipus and Teiresias,[288] and watches the slaying
of the Sphinx by the former.[289] Among Trojan scenes he is sometimes
present at the Judgment of Paris,[290] also at the sacrifice of
Iphigeneia, the pursuit of Troilos, the combats of Achilles and Ajax
with Hector, and the recognition of Aithra by her sons.[291] He is, of
course, frequently seen in subjects from the Oresteia, both in Tauris
and at Delphi,[292] and at the death of Neoptolemos before the latter
temple.[293] The pair are also seen at the carrying off of Basile by
Echelos (see p. 140).[294]

The ??a???, or primitive cult-statue, of Apollo is sometimes
represented; in one case Kassandra takes refuge from Ajax before it,
instead of the usual statue of Athena.[295]

                  *       *       *       *       *

The appearances of =Artemis=, as distinct from Apollo, need not detain
us long; she is sometimes found in mythological scenes, but frequently
as a single figure, of which there are some fine examples.[296] A
winged goddess grasping the neck or paws of an animal or bird with
either hand frequently occurs on early vases, and is usually
interpreted as Artemis in her character of p?t??a ????? or mistress of
the brute creation, sometimes called the Asiatic or Persian
Artemis.[297] On an early Boeotian vase (with reliefs) at Athens is a
curious representation of Artemis Diktynna, a quasi-marine form of the
goddess, originally Cretan (?); on the front of her body is represented
a fish, and on the either side of her is a lion.[298] As a single
figure she appears either with bow or quiver, or with lyre, sometimes
accompanied by a stag or hind, or dogs[299]; she also rides on a
deer[300] or shoots at a stag.[301] Or, again, she is attended by a
cortège of Nymphs[302] or rides in a chariot.[303] Like that of Apollo,
her ??a??? is sometimes introduced into a scene as local colouring.[304]

The myth with which she is chiefly associated is that of Aktaeon, which
may find a place here, though in most cases Aktaeon alone is
represented, being devoured by his hounds.[305] A curious subject on a
vase at Athens appears to be the burial of Aktaeon, Artemis being
present.[306] She is also represented at the sacrifice of Iphigeneia,
for whom a stag was substituted by her agency,[307] and in connection
with the same story at her shrine in Tauris.[308] She is especially
associated with Apollo in such scenes as the contest with and flaying
of Marsyas,[309] the rape of the Delphic tripod by Herakles[310] and
the subsequent reconciliation,[311] or the appearance of Orestes at
Delphi.[312] The two deities sometimes accompany nuptial processions in
chariots, Artemis as _pronuba_ holding a torch, but it is not easy to
say whether these scenes refer to the nuptials of Zeus and Hera or are
of ordinary significance.[313] A scene in which she pursues a woman and
a child with bow and arrow may have reference to the slaughter of the
Niobids.[314]

Other scenes in which she is found are the Gigantomachia[315] and the
Birth of Athena[316]; or she is seen accompanying the chariots of
Demeter[317] and Athena,[318] and with Aphrodite and Adonis.[319] She
disputes with Herakles over the Keryneian stag[320]; and is also
present when he strangles the snakes,[321] and at his apotheosis in
Athena’s chariot.[322] She attends the combat of Paris and
Menelaos,[323] and as protecting deity of Attica she watches a combat
of Greeks and Amazons.[324] A vase in Berlin, on which are depicted six
figures carrying chairs (Diphrophori, as on the Parthenon frieze) and a
boy with game, may perhaps represent a procession in honour of
Artemis.[325]

                  *       *       *       *       *

=Hephaistos= is a figure who appears but seldom, and never as
protagonist, except in the case of his return to Olympos,[326] a
subject already discussed (p. 17), as has been his appearance in the
Gigantomachia[327] and at the birth of Athena.[328] In conjunction with
the last-named goddess he completes the creation and adornment of
Pandora on two fine vases in the British Museum[329]; he is also
present at the birth of Erichthonios.[330] His sojourn below the ocean
with Thetis and the making of Achilles’ armour also occur.[331]
Representations of a forge on some B.F. vases may have reference to the
Lemnian forge of Hephaistos and his Cyclopean workmen.[332] He is also
seen with Athena,[333] at the punishment of Ixion,[334] and taking part
in a banquet with Dionysos.[335]

                  *       *       *       *       *

More important than any of the other Olympian deities, for the part she
plays in vase-paintings, is =Athena=, the great goddess of the Ionic
race, and especially of Athens. Of her birth from the head of Zeus we
have already spoken, as also of the part she plays in the Gigantomachia
(p. 15). The separate episode of her combat with Enkelados (her
invariable opponent) is frequently depicted on B.F. vases[336]; but in
one instance she tears off the arm of another giant, Akratos.[337] We
have also seen her assisting at the creation of Pandora,[338] and
contending with Poseidon for Attica.[339] She receives the infant
Dionysos at the time of his birth,[340] and is also generally present
at that of Erichthonios,[341] and once with Leto at that of Apollo and
Artemis.[342] She is, of course, an invariable actor in Judgment of
Paris scenes, in one of which she is represented washing her hands at a
fountain in preparation for the competition.[343]

From assemblies of the gods she is rarely absent, and she is also
associated with smaller groups of divinities, such as Apollo and
Artemis (p. 31), with Ares or Hephaistos,[344] or with Hermes,[345] or
in Eleusinian[346] or Dionysiac scenes.[347] Thus she assists at the
slaying of the Niobids,[348] and on one vase is confronted with
Marsyas, before whom she has just dropped the flutes.[349] Scenes in
which she appears receiving a libation from Nike are extremely
common[350]; and she is also found with Iris and Hebe.[351] In one
instance she herself pours a libation to Zeus.[352]

Generally the companion of princes and patroness of heroes, she
protects especially Herakles, whom she aids in his exploits and conveys
finally in her chariot to Olympos, where he is introduced by her to
Zeus.[353] Some scenes represent the two simply standing together[354];
in others she welcomes and refreshes him after his labours,[355] and in
one case he is supposed to be represented pursuing her.[356] It is
unnecessary to particularise here the various scenes in which she
attends Herakles (see p. 95 ff.); but one may be mentioned as peculiar,
where she carries him off in her chariot with the Delphic tripod which
he has just stolen.[357] Another rare scene connected with the Herakles
myths is one in which, after the fight with Kyknos (see p. 101), Zeus
protects her from the wrath of Ares.[358] Another of her favourite
heroes is Theseus,[359] and she is even more frequently associated with
Perseus, whom she assists to overcome and escape from the Gorgons.[360]
She gives Kadmos the stone with which to slay the dragon,[361] and is
also seen with Bellerophon,[362] Jason and the Argonauts,[363] and
Oedipus.[364] She is present at the rape of Oreithyia by Boreas,[365]
at the punishment of Ixion,[366] and at the setting out of
Amphiaraos[367]; at the stealing of Zeus’ golden dog by Pandareos[368];
also at the rape of the Leukippidae by the Dioskuri,[369] and of Basile
by Echelos (see p. 140),[370] and in a scene from the tragedy of
Merope.[371]

The scenes where she is assisting the Greek heroes in the Trojan War
are almost too numerous to specify, her favourite being of course
Achilles; her meeting with Iris (_Il._ viii. 409) is once
depicted,[372] and she also appears in connection with the dispute over
Achilles’ arms.[373] She is not so frequently seen with her other
favourite, Odysseus, but in one instance she is present when he meets
with Nausikaa,[374] and also when he blinds Polyphemos.[375] On the
numerous vases representing Ajax and Achilles (or other heroes) playing
at draughts, the figure or image of the goddess is generally present in
the background.[376] The same type on B.F. vases is adopted for the
subject of two heroes casting lots before her statue[377]; lastly, she
appears as the friend and patron of Orestes when expiating the slaying
of his mother.[378]

As a single figure Athena is represented under many types and with
various attributes, seated with her owl[379] or in meditation,[380]
writing on tablets[381] or holding the ????st????? of a ship[382];
playing on a lyre[383] or flutes,[384] or listening to a player on the
flute or lyre[385]; with a man making a helmet,[386] or herself making
the figure of a horse,[387] and in a potter’s workshop.[388] On an
early vase she appears between two lions[389]; or she is accompanied by
a hind (here grouped with other goddesses).[390] She is depicted
running,[391] and occasionally is winged[392]; or she appears mounting
a chariot, accompanied by various divinities.[393] As the protecting
goddess of Attica she watches a combat of Greeks and Amazons[394]; she
also attends the departure or watches combats of ordinary
warriors,[395] or receives a victorious one.[396] In one instance she
carries a dead warrior home.[397]

There are many representations of her image, either as a ??a??? or
cultus-statue, or recalling some well-known type of later art. Among
the former may be mentioned her statue at Troy, whereat Kassandra takes
refuge from Ajax,[398] and the Palladion carried off by Odysseus and
Diomede.[399] Among the latter, three can be traced to or connected
with creations of Pheidias: viz. the chryselephantine Parthenos
statue[400]; the Lemnian type, holding her helmet in her hand (Plate
XXXVI.)[401]; and the Promachos, in defensive attitude, with shield and
spear.[402] The last-named type (earlier, of course, than the famous
statue on the Acropolis) is that universally adopted for the figure of
Athena on the obverse of the Panathenaic amphorae, on which she is
depicted in this attitude between two Doric columns surmounted by cocks
(on the later examples by figures of Nike or Triptolemos).[403] Her
statue is also represented as standing in a shrine or heroön[404]; or
as the recipient of a sacrifice or offering.[405] Her head or bust
alone appears on several vases.[406]

                  *       *       *       *       *

=Ares=, in the few instances in which he appears on vases, is generally
in a subordinate position; he is a spectator at the birth of
Athena[407]; and appears twice on the François vase, at the wedding of
Peleus and Thetis, and again in an attitude of shame and humility, to
indicate the part he played in the story of Hephaistos and Hera; of his
combat with the former god mention has already been made (p. 16). In
the Gigantomachia his opponent is Mimas, with whom he also appears in
single combat[408]; and he aids his son Kyknos against Herakles and
Athena.[409] He is seen in several of the large groups of Olympian
deities,[410] or in smaller groups, _e.g._ with Poseidon and
Hermes,[411] with Apollo, Artemis, and Leto,[412] or with Athena[413]
or his spouse Aphrodite[414]; also with Dionysos, Ariadne, and
Nereus.[415] He also receives a libation from Hebe.[416] He is seen at
the birth of Pandora,[417] the punishment of Ixion,[418] the slaying of
the Niobids,[419] the apotheosis of Herakles,[420] and the contest of
that hero with the Nemean lion.[421] In some cases his type is not to
be distinguished from that of an ordinary warrior or hero, as in one
case where he or a warrior is seen between two women.[422]

                  *       *       *       *       *

=Aphrodite= seldom appears as a protagonist on vases, and in fact plays
a small personal part in mythology. Apart from scenes of a fanciful
nature she is usually a mere spectator of events; but as she is not
often characterised by any distinctive attribute, there is in many
cases considerable difficulty in identifying her personality. This is
especially the case on B.F. vases, on which her appearances are
comparatively rare. One vase represents her at the moment of her birth
from the sea in the presence of Eros and Peitho[423]; she also appears
(on late vases only) with Adonis,[424] embracing him, and in two
instances mourning for him after his death[425]; but caution must be
exercised in most cases in identifying this subject, which is but
little differentiated from ordinary love scenes. One scene apparently
represents Zeus deciding a dispute between her and Persephone over
Adonis.[426]

More commonly she is seen riding over the sea on a goose or swan,[427]
of which there is one exceedingly beautiful example in the British
Museum; here she is to be recognised as the Heavenly Aphrodite
(Ourania), whereas in her character of Pandemos (profane or unlicensed
love) she rides on a goat.[428] In other instances the swan draws her
chariot over the sea,[429] or she is borne by a pair of Erotes,[430] or
sails in a shell, as in the story of her birth and appearance in the
island of Kythera[431]; in others, again, her chariot is drawn (on
land) by the Erotes,[432] or by a lion, wolf, and pair of boars.[433]
She is also represented at her toilet[434] or bathing,[435] in the
latter case in the attitude of the _Vénus accroupie_ of sculpture; in
these instances again there is often difficulty in distinguishing from
scenes of ordinary life. Again, she is represented spinning,[436]
playing with a swan,[437] or caressing a hare,[438] or in company with
a young hunter,[439] possibly meant for Adonis.

[Illustration:

  From ?f. ???. 1897.
  FIG. 117. APHRODITE AND HER FOLLOWING (VASE AT ATHENS).
]

In many scenes she is grouped with a cortège of attendant Nymphs and
personified figures, often with names attached.[440] Besides Eros, the
following are found on these vases: Pothos (Longing) and Himeros
(Charm), Hygieia (Health), Peitho (Persuasion), Paidia (Play),
Pandaisia (Good Cheer), Eunomia (Orderliness), Euthymia (Cheerfulness),
Eudaimonia (Happiness), Hedylogos (Winning Speech), and Kleopatra (a
fancy name). Eros himself she embraces[441] and suckles,[442] and in
some cases he assists in her toilet, perfuming her hair from an unguent
flask,[443] or adjusting her sandals[444]; he is seldom absent from her
side on the later vases. In one instance Aphrodite and two Erotes make
a basket of golden twigs.[445] Their heads or busts are also found on
late vases, as is that of Aphrodite alone.[446]

In relation to other mythological subjects she is frequently found in
assemblies of the gods, especially in the spectator groups on Apulian
vases[447]; also at the birth of Athena (rarely),[448] at the marriage
of Zeus and Hera,[449] and in the Gigantomachia (very rare).[450] She
is seen among the Eleusinian deities,[451] and in scenes from the
nether world[452]; and she accompanies the chariots of Athena and
Demeter.[453] She also accompanies Poseidon in his wooing of
Amymone,[454] and is present at the slaying of Argos by Hermes,[455]
the punishment of Aktaeon[456] and the contest of Apollo and
Marsyas,[457] and the wooing of Europa by Zeus.[458] She is also
grouped with Apollo and the Muses listening to Thamyris and Sappho.[459]

She is seldom seen with Herakles, but is present at his
apotheosis,[460] and also with him in the Garden of the
Hesperides[461]; she is once seen with Theseus,[462] and is present at
the rape of the Leukippidae by the Dioskuri.[463] Other heroes with
whom she is connected (chiefly as a spectator on the Apulian vases) are
Kadmos, Meleager, Perseus, and Pelops.[464] In the tale of Troy,
however, she plays a more important part. The Judgment of Paris is, of
course, the scene with which she is chiefly connected[465]; in one
instance she appears alone with Paris, unless Anchises be here
meant.[466] She is present at the first meeting and wedding of Peleus
and Thetis[467]; at the toilet of Helen, and at her carrying off by
Paris[468]; she assists her son Aeneas in his combat with Diomede,[469]
and is present at the rape of Kassandra.[470] Helen takes refuge from
Menelaos with her in her temple[471]; and finally she assists Aeneas to
escape with the aged Anchises from Troy.[472]

                  *       *       *       *       *

Besides the scenes in which he appears with Aphrodite, =Eros= is a
sufficiently important personage on vases to demand a section to
himself. On the black-figured vases he never appears, nor on the
earlier red-figured ones is it possible to find many instances, but
towards the end of the fifth century his popularity is firmly
established, while on the Italian vases, especially the the later
Apulian, his presence is almost invariable, not only in mythological
scenes, but in subjects from daily life. As a single figure he occurs
again and again, generally holding a wreath, mirror, box, fan, or some
object which may be regarded as signifying a lover’s present.

Concurrently with his increasing popularity we note the change that
comes over the conception of his personality. Beginning as a full-grown
youth of fair proportions, his form gradually attenuates and becomes
more juvenile, or even in some cases infantile, as in Hellenistic art;
while on the Apulian vases it assumes an androgynous, altogether
effeminate character. His hair is arranged in feminine fashion, and his
person is adorned with earrings, bracelets, anklets, and chains,
remaining otherwise entirely nude, except that he sometimes wears soft
shoes of a feminine kind (see Plate XLIV. and Fig. 118).

On the red-figured vases he generally appears as a single figure,
though on those of the “fine” style he is often in attendance on
Aphrodite; roughly speaking, it may be said that he figures in all
scenes that deal with the passion of Love, such as the Judgment of
Paris,[473] the story of Adonis,[474] the marriage of Dionysos and
Ariadne,[475] or the love-affairs of Zeus, Poseidon, and other
gods.[476]

In other legends in which Love plays a part, such as the stories of
Jason and Medeia,[477] Phaidra and Hippolytos,[478] Peleus and Thetis
(or Theseus and Ariadne),[479] Pelops and Hippodameia,[480] Paris and
Helen,[481] he is also to be seen; as also at the carrying off of
Persephone.[482] Moreover, he occurs in several scenes where the reason
is not so apparent, as at the birth of Erichthonios,[483] in the Garden
of the Hesperides,[484] at the suckling of Herakles by Hera,[485] with
Herakles and a Centaur,[486] and in the nether world[487]; also with
deities such as Zeus, Athena, Nike, Helios and Selene, and
Dionysos[488]; anointing the head of Apollo.[489] The cosmogonic
conception of Eros and his connection with Gaia is referred to in the
next chapter under the latter heading (p. 73). Two Erotes draw the
chariot of Demeter and Persephone[490]; and he is also seen in company
with the Nereids.[491] His presence in Dionysiac scenes, especially on
the later vases, is often to be noted, though without any special
meaning to be attached to it[492]; in one instance he is carried on the
back of a Seilenos.[493] In many of these scenes he merely accompanies
Aphrodite, and they do not therefore require enumeration. Lastly, he is
seen in company with Sappho,[494] the great poetess of Love.

In non-mythological scenes he is found almost as frequently, especially
in toilet scenes,[495] or what we may regard as “scenes of courting”;
but on the later vases these exhibit little or no action, and are not
worth considering in detail, with a few exceptions. Thus we see Eros in
marriage processions,[496] in musical scenes,[497] and at
banquets[498]; at a sacrifice to a term[499]; watching girls play the
game of _morra_[500] (“How many fingers do I hold up?”); swinging them,
or being danced on their feet[501]; in scenes of fruit- and
incense-gathering[502]; or pouring wine into a krater.[503] He appears
with Agon (see p. 89) training in the palaestra.[504] He pursues a
youth or a girl,[505] embraces a girl,[506] or is carried by her
pick-a-back[507]; offers a hare to a youth,[508] or drives a youth with
a whip from an altar[509]; and in one instance is about to chastise
with a slipper two youths who are playing with a top and hoop[510];
these two latter scenes may be regarded as implying the power of Eros
over youth. He is also seen shooting an arrow at a woman,[511] an idea
characteristic of Anacreontic and Alexandrine poetry. Another scene
which recalls the wall-paintings of the Hellenistic Age is on a vase in
the British Museum, representing two Erotes being weighed in
scales.[512]

As a single figure he pursues a hare or kills a snake[513]; crouches
before a plant[514]; is represented armed with shield and spear[515];
or places a sash or wreath on a tripod.[516] He is borne in a chariot
by horses or swans,[517] or rides on a horse, deer, dog, or swan.[518]
He is also seen playing various games, such as the _kottabos_ or
_morra_,[519] see-sawing or playing knucklebones,[520] or with a ball
or hoop or toy-boat.[521] Or he plays the flute or lyre[522]; or plays
with animals, such as a deer, dove, swan[523]; or finally (on Apulian
vases) with a toy which resembles a wheel, and was probably used for
magic purposes, as several passages of literature indicate.[524]

[Illustration: FIG. 118. EROS WITH KOTTABOS-STAND (BRIT. MUS.).]

Lastly, we must give a survey of the frequent representations of Eros
flying through the air carrying some attribute, which are so universal
on the Italian vases, though some of the earliest types also represent
him in this manner. Thus he carries a hare, or dove or other bird[525];
fruit (such as grapes or pomegranates), flowers, and branches[526];
wreaths, dishes of fruit, baskets, vases of various forms, and a spit
of meat[527]; thyrsi, tambourines, lyres, torches, incense-burners,
strigils, and ladders[528]; fans, parasols, mirrors, toilet-boxes,
strings of beads, and sashes, or balls.[529]

                  *       *       *       *       *

Among the other associates of Aphrodite the chief are Peitho, Pothos,
and Himeros, of whom mention has already been made. =Peitho=, except
where her name is given, is not always easy to identify; the other two
are not differentiated from Eros in form, and are, in fact, only
variations of the conception of Love, as are the more rarely occurring
Phthonos (_Amor invidiosus_)[530] and Talas (_Amor infelix_), the
latter of whom is associated with Sappho.[531] Peitho is found with
Himeros in one instance,[532] and in another with Eukleia[533]; she
also accompanies Aphrodite in Eleusinian and other scenes,[534] at the
deliverance of Andromeda,[535] in the Garden of the Hesperides,[536]
and at the rape of Helen[537] and the Leukippidae,[538] and at the
recovery of Helen by Menelaos[539]; she consoles her when mourning for
Adonis[540]; and is present at the moment of her birth.[541] Like Eros,
she is seen in company with Sappho,[542] and she also appears with
Meleager and Atalante.[543]

                  *       *       *       *       *

=Pothos= and =Himeros= are seen floating over the sea with Eros on a
fine R.F. vase in the British Museum,[544] and at the Judgment of
Paris[545]; and grouped together generally as Erotes, they may be
distinguished on some late vases. Pothos attends at the toilet of
Helen,[546] and plays the flutes in a Dionysiac scene.[547] Himeros is
seen swinging Paidia (another of Aphrodite’s following)[548]; at the
marriage of Herakles and Hebe[549]; presenting a crown to
Dionysos,[550] or removing his shoes,[551] and accompanying him in a
scene of preparation for the Satyric drama.[552]

                  *       *       *       *       *

=Hermes=, the messenger of the gods, is a common figure on vases of all
periods, but chiefly as a subordinate agent, though he plays a leading
part in some scenes, and frequently occurs as a single figure.[553]
Some small vases are decorated merely with his head, wearing the winged
petasos.[554] He is represented passing over the sea with a lyre,[555]
carrying a ram,[556] riding on a ram or goat,[557] or reclining on the
latter animal[558]; also as making a libation[559] or sacrificing a
goat.[560] He presides over the palaestra,[561] and is also seen
standing between Sphinxes,[562] or again (apparently as a statue)
standing by a fountain.[563] In one scene he leads a dog disguised as a
pig,[564] and he is also represented tending a flock of sheep,[565] or
fishing.[566]

The story so vividly recounted in the Homeric hymn of his infantile
theft of Apollo’s oxen is given in several scenes, including his taking
refuge in his cradle (Fig. 119)[567]; he is also represented with his
mother Maia,[568] and disputing with Apollo over the lyre which he
invented.[569] The only other myth in which he plays a chief part is
his pursuit of the Nymph Herse in the presence of her father Kekrops
and her sister Aglauros.[570] He appears in the Gigantomachia (in one
instance as Zeus’ charioteer),[571] frequently at the birth of
Athena,[572] and with the bridal _cortège_ of Zeus and Hera[573]; also
in numerous assemblies of the Olympian deities, especially on the
Apulian vases.[574] He is present at the seizing of Ganymede,[575] and
defends Hera against an attack of Seileni.[576] His slaying of Argos
and deliverance of Io has already been mentioned[577]; and he assists
in recovering the golden dog of Zeus which was stolen by Pandareos.[578]

[Illustration:

  From _Baumeister_.

  FIG. 119. HERMES WITH APOLLO’S OXEN.
]

He is present at the return of Hephaistos,[579] at Poseidon’s capture
of Amymone,[580] with Aphrodite mourning for Adonis,[581] and with
Apollo slaying Tityos and the Niobids and contending with Marsyas,[582]
also at his reconciliation with Herakles.[583] He accompanies the
chariots of Poseidon, Apollo, and Athena,[584] and also those of
mortals, especially in wedding processions[585]; and he is also seen
with Eos and Selene,[586] Kastor and Polydeukes,[587] Prometheus,[588]
Leda at the finding of the egg,[589] and at the birth of Pandora.[590]
He is specially associated with Zeus, Apollo, Athena, and
Dionysos,[591] and also appears with Aphrodite Pandemos[592]; he is not
infrequently found in Dionysiac scenes[593]; and to him is entrusted
the newly born Dionysos to be handed over to the Nymphs of Nysa.[594]
On B.F. vases he is frequently seen leading a procession of Nymphs.[595]

As a Chthonian deity he is present in many scenes relating to the
nether world, especially on the large Apulian vases,[596] and in
connection with the Eleusinian myths, such as the carrying off of
Persephone.[597] As Psychagogos or Psychopompos he is seen in Hades
waiting to conduct Persephone to earth, or actually _en route_ with
her.[598] He frequently performs the same office for mortals,
conducting them to Charon’s bark.[599] He is also found in company with
Thanatos,[600] and with Herakles bringing back Alkestis.[601] A unique
scene with Hermes in his Chthonian capacity is on a vase where he is
represented chaining up Kerberos[602]; and another, yet more curious,
depicts him standing by a jar (p????) from which a number of small
winged figures (e?d??a or ghosts) are flying out, with a supposed
reference to the Athenian festival of the ???????a.[603]

In the stories of Herakles he plays an important part, as also in those
of Theseus and other heroes, and he is frequently visible in scenes
from the Trojan legends. He conveys the infant Herakles to Cheiron for
instruction,[604] and conducts the hero to Hades to fetch
Kerberos[605]; he is also seen feasting or bathing with him,[606] and
in company with him and Athena,[607] and most frequently in connection
with his apotheosis.[608] With Theseus he is found more rarely[609];
but he frequently accompanies Perseus in his flight from the
Gorgons.[610] In other heroic scenes he is often one of the spectator
deities on Apulian vases. In one instance he is seen banqueting with an
unidentified hero.[611]

In the Trojan legends his chief appearance is as conductor of the
goddesses to the Judgment of Paris[612]; and in one case he accompanies
Peleus when bringing the infant Achilles to Cheiron.[613] He also
assists Zeus in weighing the souls of Achilles and Hector,[614]
conducts Priam to Achilles,[615] and is present in many other scenes
which need not be recounted in detail. A scene difficult of explanation
represents him accompanying Odysseus in a chariot.[616]

A Herm or terminal figure of Hermes is a not uncommon feature on vases,
especially of the R.F. period,[617] and generally as the object of a
sacrifice made to it.[618]

Last of the Olympian deities comes =Hestia=, who is usually coupled
with Hermes; she, however, only appears on a few vases in gatherings of
the Olympian deities,[619] as on the François vase, where she attends
the nuptials of Peleus and Thetis, and at the marriage of Herakles and
Hebe.[620]

-----

Footnote 1:

  _Il._ xi. 635: cf. Athen, xi. 489 F.

Footnote 2:

  i. 27 ff.: cf. Vol. I. p. 180.

Footnote 3:

  Athenaeus, xi. p. 489 B.

Footnote 4:

  _Ibid._ p. 782 B.

Footnote 5:

  _Od._ 5.

Footnote 6:

  _H.N._ xxxiii. 155.

Footnote 7:

  _Ibid._ 156.

Footnote 8:

  Mart. viii. 51: cf. Juv. i. 76.

Footnote 9:

  Stat. _Theb._ i. 543.

Footnote 10:

  Virg. _Ecl._ iii. 46.

Footnote 11:

  Schreiber, _Alexandr. Toreutik, passim_; Robert in _50^{tes}
  Winckelmannsfestprogr._ 1890.

Footnote 12:

  Suet. _Ner._ 47: see Vol. I. pp. 134, 185, 499.

Footnote 13:

  Cf. Miss Harrison, _Mythol. and Monum. of Athens_, p. ii; and see
  Vol. I. p. 13.

Footnote 14:

  See on this subject _J.H.S._ xiii. p. 83.

Footnote 15:

  _Art. Poet._ 147.

Footnote 16:

  See Luckenbach in _Jahrb. für Class. Phil._ Suppl.-Bd. xi. (1880), p.
  575 ff.

Footnote 17:

  _Op. cit._ p. 493 ff.

Footnote 18:

  The only exceptions are in the Panathenaic contests, which are of
  course not epic: cf. B.M. B 130–31.

Footnote 19:

  See on this subject _Comm. in hon. T. Mommseni_, p. 163 ff.; _Arch.
  Zeit._ 1876, p. 116; Dumont-Pottier, i. p. 366, and, _J.H.S._ x. p.
  13 ff.

Footnote 20:

  Luckenbach, _op. cit._ p. 560 ff.

Footnote 21:

  There is only one vase (Naples 2296 = Reinach, _Répertoire_, i. 476)
  on which the names of the Nereids are derived from Homer.

Footnote 22:

  _Op. et Di._ 60 ff.; _Scut._ 345 ff., 178, 216; _Theog._ 820, 924 ff.

Footnote 23:

  See _J.H.S._ xviii. p. 267.

Footnote 24:

  Vol. I. p. 472: see also below, p. 159. On the subject generally see
  Vogel, _Scenen Eur. Trag._; Huddilston, _Gk. Tragedy in
  Vase-paintings_; Engelmann, _Arch. Studien zu den Tragikern_.

Footnote 25:

  Reinach, i. p. 114.

Footnote 26:

  _Op. cit._ p. 636.

Footnote 27:

  See for further details of early theories Vol. I. p. 21.

Footnote 28:

  _E.g._ the B.F. hydriae with water-drawing scenes; the funeral
  lekythi; and the R.F. cups with their subjects relating to banquets
  and revels.

Footnote 29:

  See also Chapters VI.–XI. throughout.

Footnote 30:

  Morgenthau, _Zusammenhang d. Bilder auf gr. Vasen_.

Footnote 31:

  Cf. for instance E 39, 45, 47, 48, in B.M.

Footnote 32:

  See below, p. 108.

Footnote 33:

  See p. 134.

Footnote 34:

  This subject has been admirably treated by Wickhoff in his _Roman
  Art_ (Eng. edn.), p. 13 ff.

Footnote 35:

  The publication of this vase by Furtwaengler and Reichhold, _Gr.
  Vasenmalerei_, pls. 1–3, 11–13, with full discussion of subjects and
  technical details, has now superseded all previous illustrations. The
  only other complete ones were in _Mon. dell’ Inst._ iv. 54–8
  (Reinach, i. p. 134–36) and _Wiener Vorl._ ii. pls. 1–5. The general
  view given in Plate XXVIII. is reproduced from the first-named work.

Footnote 36:

  For the abbreviations used in the following notes see the
  Bibliography (Vol. I.).

Footnote 37:

  Munich 125 = Reinach, ii. 120 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 32;
  B.M. F 237: cf. also B.M. B 62.

Footnote 38:

  The best and most complete examples are as follows:—B.F.: B.M. B 208;
  Reinach, i. 162 = Louvre E 732. R.F.: B.M. E 47, 469; Berlin 2293,
  2531 (both in _Wiener Vorl._ i. pls. 8 and 5; the latter very good);
  Bibl. Nat. 573 = Reinach, ii. 256. Best of all (late R.F.), a grand
  vase found in Melos (_Monum. Grecs_, 1875, pt. 4, pls. 1–2 = _Wiener
  Vorl._ viii. 7), on which no less than eighteen deities are engaged,
  but none of the giants are named. Hera, Hephaistos, and Amphitrite
  are absent. Figs. 111 and 112 give two of these—E 732 in Louvre, and
  the interior of Berlin 2531.

Footnote 39:

  _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1890, p. 8.

Footnote 40:

  Reinach, ii. 188 = _Él. Cér._ i. 5.

Footnote 41:

  B.M. E 47; Berlin 2293.

Footnote 42:

  B.M. B 253, E 443 (and see p. 56).

Footnote 43:

  _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ xx. (1896), pl. 7: cf. the archaic frieze of
  the Siphnian treasury at Delphi.

Footnote 44:

  B.F.: B.M. B 147 (a very fine early example, but much restored), 244
  (Fig. 113), 424; Berlin 1704 (also good). R.F.: B.M. E 15, E 410
  (fine); Reinach, ii. 207.

Footnote 45:

  Reinach, i. 171.

Footnote 46:

  Reinach in _Revue des Études Grecques_, 1901, p. 127, traces the
  subject to a Megarian origin.

Footnote 47:

  _B.M. Vases_, ii. p. 11.

Footnote 48:

  B.M. B 147, 218, 244.

Footnote 49:

  _Cat._ 444.

Footnote 50:

  See B.M. B 157, B 341; also Berlin 1899 (= _Él. Cér._ i. 22) and
  Reinach, ii. 21, 2.

Footnote 51:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 197 (a fine vase, by Amasis?) and B 298: see on the
  subject Foerster, _Hochzeit des Zeus und Hera_.

Footnote 52:

  B.M. E 82; Wernicke, _Ant. Denkm._ pl. 1, 7 = Reinach, ii. 266.

Footnote 53:

  Petersburg 355 = Reinach, i. 14 = _Wiener Vorl._ iii. 5 (also
  interpreted as a sculptor finishing off a statue of Hera).

Footnote 54:

  B.M. F 269 (gods nicknamed respectively Daidalos and Enyalios).

Footnote 55:

  B.F.: François vase; B.M. B 42 (Plate XXI.), 264; Vienna 218; Athens
  628 = _Ath. Mitth._ 1894, pl. 8. R.F.: Bibl. Nat. 539 = Reinach, ii.
  261; Reinach, ii. 3 = Millin-Reinach, i. 9; Reinach, ii. 311; Munich
  776 = Baumeister, i. p. 644, fig. 714 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold,
  pl. 29; Munich 780 = _Él. Cér._: i. pl. 46 A = _Wiener Vorl._ i. 9, 3.

Footnote 56:

  See below, p. 107; the best examples are Berlin 2278 = _Ant. Denkm._
  i. 9 (Sosias); B.M. B 379; Reinach, ii. 76 (in Berlin).

Footnote 57:

  B.M. B 345; E 67, 444; Berlin 2060; Reinach, i. 157, 1, 2 and 203 =
  Baumeister, iii. pl. 93, fig. 2400 (by Oltos and Euxitheos, a very
  fine example); a late instance, Petersburg 419 = Reinach, i. 161.

Footnote 58:

  Reinach, i. 98; 194 (Dareios in council).

Footnote 59:

  B.M. F 278; Reinach, i. 379.

Footnote 60:

  B.M. F 271.

Footnote 61:

  B.M. F 279.

Footnote 62:

  Numerous examples will be found in the pages of Reinach’s
  _Répertoire_.

Footnote 63:

  Rape of Persephone: Reinach, i. 99; other scenes, _ibid._ i. 355;
  B.M. F 270.

Footnote 64:

  E 668 = Reinach, i. 435; and cf. Jatta 1405 = Reinach, i. 483; Bibl.
  Nat. 489.

Footnote 65:

  Reinach, ii. 287.

Footnote 66:

  B.M. B 425: cf. _Mus. Greg._ ii. 21, 1.

Footnote 67:

  _Él. Cér._ i. 82 (also i. 22?), and Vienna 329.

Footnote 68:

  _Él. Cér._ ii. 30 (may be Poseidon); Micali, _Mon. Ined._ 37, 3; B.M.
  E 432 (Artemis); Naples S.A. 702 = Reinach, i. 499 and Reinach, ii.
  183 (Aphrodite); Bibl. Nat. 229 (Zeus with Hera, Athena, Ares, and
  Hermes); _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1898, p. 189, and _Boston Mus. Report_,
  1899, No. 15 (with Hermes).

Footnote 69:

  B.M. B 166, B 379, B 424, E 262; Furtwaengler and Reichhold, 20;
  Berlin 1857 (H. plays lyre); Petersburg 1775 = _Wiener Vorl._ iii. 9,
  1 = Reinach, i. 302 (parody): and see below, p. 107.

Footnote 70:

  Reinach, i. 156, 1.

Footnote 71:

  _Él. Cér._ i. 14 (now in B.M.); Munich 345 = Reinach, i. 66.

Footnote 72:

  _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1895, p. 38 (fine polychrome pyxis in Berlin).

Footnote 73:

  B.M. E 381; _Él. Cér._ i. 20.

Footnote 74:

  B.M. F 278; Roscher, iii. p. 969.

Footnote 75:

  Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 68 (in Louvre): cf. Eusebius, _Prep.
  evang._ iii. 84_b_.

Footnote 76:

  _Él. Cér._ i. 29A (doubtful).

Footnote 77:

  Reinach, i. 335, 2.

Footnote 78:

  _Él. Cér._ i. 18 (= Helbig, ii. p. 310, No. 104); Bibl. Nat. 416 =
  Reinach, i. 472; Berlin 2032 = Reinach, i. 334.

Footnote 79:

  _Röm. Mitth._ 1887, pl. 10.

Footnote 80:

  B.M. F 542.

Footnote 81:

  B.M. E 313; Reinach, i. 408.

Footnote 82:

  Petersburg 1792 = Reinach, i. 1: see Robert, _Arch. Märchen_, pl. 2,
  p. 179 ff.

Footnote 83:

  Petersburg 1793 = Reinach, i. 3; Bibl. Nat. 219 = _Mon. Ant. di
  Barone_, pl. 1; _Boston Mus. Report_, 1895, No. 27: see also for the
  first Robert, _Arch. Märchen_, pl. 3, p. 189.

Footnote 84:

  B.M. E 182; Bibl. Nat. 440 = Reinach, ii. 260; and see p. 55, note
  644.

Footnote 85:

  B.M. F 150; _Jahrbuch_, i. (1886), p. 276 (see Vol. I. p. 473).

Footnote 86:

  B.M. F 149 (signed by Python) = _J.H.S._ xi. pl. 6; B.M. F 193.

Footnote 87:

  B.M. F 286; Reinach, i. 278.

Footnote 88:

  B.M. E 711; Petersburg 1723 = Baumeister, i. p. 406, fig. 447 (both
  R.F.).

Footnote 89:

  Aegina: Helbig, ii. p. 311, No. 113 = Wernicke, _Ant. Denkm._ 6, 4;
  Berlin 3239 = _Él. Cér._ i. 17; _Boston Mus. Report_ for 1895, No. 39
  (a sister brings the news to her father Asopos). Thaleia: Reinach,
  ii. 285 = _Él. Cér._ i. 16 = Wernicke, 6, 3.

Footnote 90:

  Reinach, ii. 144: see below, p. 82.

Footnote 91:

  B.F.: Louvre E 696 = Reinach, i. 162; Athens 853 = Reinach, i. 507;
  _id._ ii. 49. R.F.: B.M. E 231; Munich 208 = Jahn, _Entführung d.
  Europa_, pl. 7 (polychrome on white); Petersburg 1637 = Reinach, i.
  24, and 1915 = Reinach, i. 22 (Europa brought to Zeus). Late: B.M. F
  184; Naples 3218 = Jahn, _op. cit._ pl. 1 (Eros on bull).

Footnote 92:

  Helbig, ii. p. 312, No. 118 = Overbeck, _Kunstmythol. Atlas_, pl. 6,
  fig. 13.

Footnote 93:

  See generally _Boston Mus. Report_, 1900, p. 62, and _Jahrbuch_,
  1903, p. 37; also _Wiener Vorl._ 1890–91, pl. 12.

Footnote 94:

  Berlin 3164, and Reinach, ii. 16 = _Él. Cér._ i. 25, 26.

Footnote 95:

  Reinach, i. 407.

Footnote 96:

  _Ibid._ i. 111, 1 = Berlin 2651 (R.F.), and 111, 2 = Munich 573 =
  _Wiener Vorl._ 1890–91, pl. 12, 1 (B.F.); _Boston Mus. Report_, 1900,
  No. 21.

Footnote 97:

  B.M. B 164; Bibl. Nat. 302 = _Él. Cér._ iii. 97; Reinach, i. 363;
  Vienna 338 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1890–91, pl. 11, 1 = Fig. 114; _ibid._ i.
  111, 4 = Jatta 1498 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1890–91, pl. 12, 2.

Footnote 98:

  See generally Overbeck, _Kunstmythol._ ii. p. 27 ff., 181 ff.

Footnote 99:

  Reinach, i. 388.

Footnote 100:

  See p. 101; Zeus defending Athena against Ares after the combat,
  _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1898, p. 51 (Boston vase).

Footnote 101:

  See p. 130.

Footnote 102:

  B.M. E 140; Reinach, i. 342, 405, 452; _ibid._ i. 229; i. 235.

Footnote 103:

  B.M. E 467 and _J.H.S._ xxi. pl. 1; Petersburg 1807 = Reinach, i. 7.

Footnote 104:

  B.M. B 316; E 224; Naples 2638 = Reinach, i. 78.

Footnote 105:

  Munich 745 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 16.

Footnote 106:

  See p. 141.

Footnote 107:

  See above, p. 16.

Footnote 108:

  Munich 336 = Overbeck, _Kunstmythol. Atlas_, pl. 9, 19; head only,
  _Él. Cér._ i. 29; also perhaps in Naples 2900 = Baumeister, iii. p.
  1653, fig. 1714; but more probably Aphrodite is intended.

Footnote 109:

  Overbeck, _op. cit._ iii. p. 18; Reinach, i. 231, ii. 16.

Footnote 110:

  _Él. Cér._ i. 34.

Footnote 111:

  Bibl. Nat. 542 = Reinach, i. 141.

Footnote 112:

  Reinach, i. 388.

Footnote 113:

  B.M. E 155.

Footnote 114:

  B.M. E 467.

Footnote 115:

  B.M. B 164; Berlin 3164; Reinach, i. 111, 4.

Footnote 116:

  B.M. F 107.

Footnote 117:

  Naples 2873 = Millin-Reinach, i. 3: cf. B.M. F 148 and Reinach, i.
  301.

Footnote 118:

  Reinach, ii. 4.

Footnote 119:

  B.M. B 379; Berlin 2278; Furtwaengler and Reichhold, 20.

Footnote 120:

  Bibl. Nat. 253 = Reinach, i. 399.

Footnote 121:

  B.M. B 57: cf. the Hera a???f???? at Sparta (Paus. iii. 15, 9).

Footnote 122:

  Petersburg 1792 = Reinach, i. 1; Bibl. Nat. 219.

Footnote 123:

  _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1898, p. 586.

Footnote 124:

  Jatta 1093 = Reinach, i. 175.

Footnote 125:

  Reinach, i. 463.

Footnote 126:

  Naples 2202 = Dubois-Maisonneuve, _Introd._ pls. 45–46.

Footnote 127:

  Reinach, ii. 9, 321 and _Él. Cér._ i. 30 (Hebe); Reinach, ii. 325
  (Iris).

Footnote 128:

  B.M. E 65 = Reinach, i. 193.

Footnote 129:

  B.M. B 147, E 410.

Footnote 130:

  B.M. B 197.

Footnote 131:

  B.M. E 82; Berlin 2278 = _Ant. Denkm._ i. 9.

Footnote 132:

  See above, p. 13 (esp. Berlin 2531 (Fig. 112), Reinach, ii. 188 =
  _Él. Cér._ i. 5, _Boston Mus. Report_, 1898, No. 41, and Helbig, ii.
  p. 304, No. 81 = _Mus. Greg._ ii. pl. 56, 1); B.M. B 166; Berlin
  2278; Reinach, ii. 76; Louvre F 30 = _Rev. Arch._ xiii. (1889), pl. 4
  (by Amasis).

Footnote 133:

  B.M. B 425: cf. _Mus. Greg._ ii. 21, 1.

Footnote 134:

  B.M. B 212, B 262, and Reinach, ii. 23, 30 = Munich 145 (Apollo);
  _Boston Mus. Report_, 1896, No. 1, and Athens 750 (Hermes); Athens
  838, _Él. Cér._ ii. 30(?), iii. 13, 36 A (Athena and Hermes); B.M. B
  191 (Ares and Hermes), B 228 (Athena, Ares, Herakles); _Bourguignon
  Sale Cat._ 41 (Apollo, Eros, Nereids, Papposilenos).

Footnote 135:

  B.M. E 140.

Footnote 136:

  Reinach, ii. 35; and see B.M. E 445.

Footnote 137:

  Berlin 347–473 (alone), 474–537 (with A.): see also 787–833;
  specimens published in _Ant. Denkm._ i. pls. 7–8 (_e.g._ Fig. 115 =
  Berlin 495).

Footnote 138:

  B.M. E 322; Berlin 2164; Bibl. Nat. 363 = Reinach, ii. 257, 4;
  _ibid._ ii. 22, 8; Petersburg 1531, 2164. With Amphitrite pouring a
  libation: _Wiener Vorl._ vii. 2 (Duris in Louvre).

Footnote 139:

  Reinach, ii. 35.

Footnote 140:

  Athens 880; Bibl. Nat. 314.

Footnote 141:

  Berlin 1869; Athens 836; Reinach, ii. 22; B.M. B 254 (?f??d?t?
  inscribed by error for ?µf?t??t?).

Footnote 142:

  Naples 3219 = Reinach, i. 125.

Footnote 143:

  _Él. Cér._ iii. 14.

Footnote 144:

  Plate L.: cf. Bibl. Nat. 222 = Reinach, ii. 251 = Rayet and
  Collignon, p. 121.

Footnote 145:

  Reinach, i. 124, 465, ii. 22 (Jatta 1346), 181; Athens 1171 =
  Heydemann, _Gr. Vas._ pl. 2, 1. Amymone alone may be intended on
  Bibl. Nat. 359.

Footnote 146:

  B.M. E 174; Reinach, ii. 23 = Helbig, ii. p. 309, No. 102.

Footnote 147:

  Bibl. Nat. 432 = Millin-Reinach, ii. 20; _Él. Cér._ iii. 20–25; Bibl.
  Nat. 370; Reinach, i. 286 = _Wiener Vorl._ viii. 2, by Brygos
  (perhaps the Nymph Salamis: cf. _J.H.S._ ix. p. 56; the scenes on the
  exterior of this cup may refer to Kychreus, the son of Poseidon and
  Salamis, and the snake slain by him). Athens 1551 = Heydemann, _Gr.
  Vas._ pl. 1, fig. 2, seems to represent Poseidon pursuing a Nereid.

Footnote 148:

  _J.H.S._ xviii. pp. 277–79, and cf. pl. 14 (Louvre G 104, by
  Euphronios), where Theseus is received by Amphitrite.

Footnote 149:

  Bibl. Nat. 418 = _J.H.S._ xviii. p. 278.

Footnote 150:

  B.M. E 264.

Footnote 151:

  Reinach, i. 361.

Footnote 152:

  _E.g._ i. 36.

Footnote 153:

  Reinach, i. 108, 195; Berlin 2634; Reinach, i. 379; i. 99; B.M. E
  467; B.M. F 279; Reinach, i. 98.

Footnote 154:

  B.M. B 196, Munich 114 = Reinach, i. 422; Reinach, ii. 61; and see
  B.M. B 228; Reinach, i. 301; ii. 66 (Kyknos).

Footnote 155:

  B.M. B 57.

Footnote 156:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1886, pl. 10 (with the Graiae); _Mon. Grecs_, 1878, pl.
  2 (in Louvre).

Footnote 157:

  Millin-Reinach, ii. 4.

Footnote 158:

  B.M. B 428 = Roscher, iii. 247.

Footnote 159:

  B.M. E 9, 73; Reinach, i. 64, i. 78 (= Naples 2638), ii. 278; _Wiener
  Vorl._ vii. 2 (Duris in Louvre); Munich 369 = Furtwaengler and
  Reichhold, 24 (Hieron): all R.F. See also p. 120.

Footnote 160:

  B.M. B 201; Reinach, i. 346, 6–7.

Footnote 161:

  B.M. B 225, E 162; Bibl. Nat. 255 = Reinach, ii. 61. See p. 101.

Footnote 162:

  Reinach, i. 339.

Footnote 163:

  Berlin 1732 = Reinach, ii. 66 (inscribed ????? G????).

Footnote 164:

  Reinach, ii. 76.

Footnote 165:

  Naples 3352 = Reinach, i. 485.

Footnote 166:

  B.M. B 551.

Footnote 167:

  Athens 1551.

Footnote 168:

  B.M. E 109; Berlin 1676 = Reinach, ii. 22; Louvre F 148.

Footnote 169:

  B.M. B 223, 311; Reinach, i. 227, ii. 61, 1. See p. 101.

Footnote 170:

  _J.H.S._ xviii. p. 277.

Footnote 171:

  Naples 3412 = Reinach, i. 498.

Footnote 172:

  B.M. B 166 (Palaimon?), E 156 (Leukothea: see p. 136); Reinach, i.
  319 (Ino?): for possible instances of Melikertes see Berlin 779, 780,
  914, and Roscher, ii. p. 2635.

Footnote 173:

  Naples 1767 = Engelmann-Anderson, _Atlas to Homer_, _Od._ pl. iv. 22;
  B.M. B 201.

Footnote 174:

  B.M. F 218.

Footnote 175:

  Berlin 1007, 1008; _Él. Cér._ iii. 31 and 32 B (fem.); see Vol. I. p.
  314.

Footnote 176:

  _Ant. Denkm._ i. 59 (Branteghem Coll. 85); B.M. E 774 (names given to
  fancy scene): see also Munich 331; Naples 2638 = Reinach, i. 78, 2;
  and Kretschmer, _Gr. Vaseninschr._ p. 200.

Footnote 177:

  See p. 25, note 159; also Reinach, p. 231.

Footnote 178:

  B.M. F 69; Jatta 1496 = Reinach, i. 112; Reinach, i. 300; Roscher,
  iii. 221–24: see generally Heydemann’s _Nereiden mit Waffen_.

Footnote 179:

  Louvre E 643 = Reinach, i. 311.

Footnote 180:

  Reinach, i. 83, 232.

Footnote 181:

  _Ibid._ ii. 61.

Footnote 182:

  Berlin 3241 = Roscher, iii. 218; Petersburg 1915 = Reinach, i. 21.

Footnote 183:

  Reinach, i. 286.

Footnote 184:

  B.M. B 155.

Footnote 185:

  _Bourguignon Sale Cat._ 41; and in assemblies of the gods, Reinach,
  ii. 76.

Footnote 186:

  Naples 3222 = Reinach, i. 167.

Footnote 187:

  Vase in Boston (1900 Report, No. 4): cf. for a Nereid(?) with
  dolphins, Louvre G 3.

Footnote 188:

  _Mon. Grecs_, 1875, pt. 4, pls. 1–2.

Footnote 189:

  The best example is a votive plaque found at Eleusis in 1895 (Athens
  1968 = ?f. ???. 1901, pl. 1): see also Petersburg 1792 and 525 =
  Reinach, i. 1 and 11 = Baumeister, i. pp. 474–75.

Footnote 190:

  For other deities in Eleusinian scenes, see under Aphrodite, Hermes,
  Dionysos, Hekate.

Footnote 191:

  B.M. F 68.

Footnote 192:

  _Rev. Arch._ xxxvi. (1900), p. 93.

Footnote 193:

  Petersburg 1792–93 = Reinach, i. 1, 3.

Footnote 194:

  Reinach, ii. 32; B.M. F 90.

Footnote 195:

  Reinach, ii. 321; Athens 1844 = _Ath. Mitth._ 1881, pl. 4.

Footnote 196:

  Athens 1626 = Dumont-Pottier, pl. 37.

Footnote 197:

  _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1895, p. 39 (Berlin): cf. ?f. ???. 1893, pl. 9, and
  see p. 140 below.

Footnote 198:

  Berlin 1704 = Reinach, i. 197.

Footnote 199:

  Berlin 2634.

Footnote 200:

  Athens 1120 = _Ath. Mitth._ 1901, pl. 8.

Footnote 201:

  Reinach, ii. 329 (very dubious): cf. a terracotta from Cyprus in B.M.
  (A 326).

Footnote 202:

  B.F.: Reinach, ii. 32–33. R.F.: B.M. E 140 (Plate LI.); E 183, E 281,
  E 469; Petersburg 1207 = Reinach, i. 10; _Wiener Vorl._ iv. 7, 4.
  Late: Petersburg 350 = Reinach, i. 12; Helbig, 127 = Millin-Reinach,
  ii. 31, and 152 = Reinach, ii. 34; _Wiener Vorl._ i. 6.

Footnote 203:

  _Él. Cér._ iii. 62; a newly acquired R.F. amphora in B.M.: see also
  Roscher, _E.g._ Keleos, p. 1028; Reinach, i. 286 (?); Munich 336.

Footnote 204:

  B.M. E 274 and Munich 299: see Overbeck, _Kunstmythol._ iii. p. 535.

Footnote 205:

  Bibl. Nat. 424 = Reinach, i. 463.

Footnote 206:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1899, pl. 7.

Footnote 207:

  Naples S.A. 11 = Reinach, i. 401.

Footnote 208:

  Reinach, i. 124.

Footnote 209:

  _Ibid._ i. 156, 1: see Apollod. iii. 14, 4, and Hygin. _Astron._ ii.
  7.

Footnote 210:

  B.F.: B.M. B 310. R.F.: Reinach, i. 99, 156, 2; B.M. F 277;
  Baumeister, i. pl. 7, fig. 462: and see Helbig, 144 = Overbeck,
  _Kunstmythol. Atlas_, 18, 12.

Footnote 211:

  See below, p. 67; also Berlin 1844 and _Mus. Greg._ ii. 21, 1, for
  earlier examples.

Footnote 212:

  Reinach, i. 389 and 401 (= Naples S.A. 11); _ibid._ ii. 70.

Footnote 213:

  B.M. E 82, F 68.

Footnote 214:

  B.F.: B.M. B 261; Munich 728 = Reinach, ii. 48. Late: B.M. F 332 =
  Plate XLV.

Footnote 215:

  Reinach, i. 522, 1 = Roscher, ii. p. 1378; Baumeister, i. p. 423,
  fig. 463 (inscribed).

Footnote 216:

  Reinach, i. 228 (Berlin 2646) and 348 (Boston); _Arch. Anzeiger_,
  1895, p. 37 (Berlin); Harrison, _Prolegomena to Gk. Religion_, p. 277
  (vase in Dresden; Satyrs astonished; Hermes present).

Footnote 217:

  Reinach, i. 144 = Louvre F 311 = Baumeister, i. p. 445, fig. 493.

Footnote 218:

  Robert, _Arch. Märchen_, p. 198 ff.: see _J.H.S._ xix. p. 232, xx. p.
  106 ff., and _Jahrbuch_, vi. (1891), p. 113; also below, under
  Ge-Pandora (p. 73), and Harrison, _Prolegom. to Gk. Religion_, p. 277
  ff.

Footnote 219:

  For a more complete tabulation see Overbeck, _Kunstmythologie_, vol.
  iv., especially pp. 42 ff., 322 ff.; also the plates of vol. ii. of
  the _Él. Cér._, and the Atlas to Overbeck, pls. 19 to end.

Footnote 220:

  Bibl. Nat. 367 = Reinach, ii. 257.

Footnote 221:

  B.M. B 260, 681.

Footnote 222:

  B.M. B 592; Berlin 1868.

Footnote 223:

  _Él. Cér._ ii. 3; ii. 6A = Petersburg 411.

Footnote 224:

  B.M. B 195, F 145(?); Berlin 1867; Reinach, ii. 29.

Footnote 225:

  Reinach, ii. 286.

Footnote 226:

  B.M. E 80.

Footnote 227:

  B.M. E 516; _Él. Cér._ ii. 4.

Footnote 228:

  B.M. E 232; Reinach, ii. 157, 296; _Wiener Vorl._ A. 10, 2.

Footnote 229:

  B.M. E 543; Reinach, ii. 228; Berlin 2641 = _Él. Cér._ ii. 44.

Footnote 230:

  Helbig, 97 = Reinach, i. 79 = Baumeister, i. p. 102, fig. 108.

Footnote 231:

  Millin-Reinach, i. 46; Petersburg 411 = _Él. Cér._ ii. 6A.

Footnote 232:

  B.M. F 311; Naples 2902 = _Él. Cér._ ii. 97A.

Footnote 233:

  Reinach, ii. 310 = _Él. Cér._ ii. 65.

Footnote 234:

  B.M. B 260, 548, E 274, 383, 514; Brygos vase in Louvre = Reinach. i.
  246; Naples R.C. 169 = Reinach, i. 313 (Artemis with torch; localised
  at Delphi by a crow on the omphalos).

Footnote 235:

  _Él. Cér._ ii. 10 (Berlin 2206) and 32; Vienna 331; Reinach, ii. 27;
  B.M. E 579; _Forman Sale Cat._ 356.

Footnote 236:

  B.M. E 262; Reinach ii. 26 (= Louvre F 297), 284 (?); on Melian
  amphora (Athens 475 = Rayet and Çollignon, pl. 3), Apollo in chariot,
  before which stands Artemis with stag.

Footnote 237:

  B.M. B 680, E 256; Reinach, ii. 27–8, 45 (Naples S.A. 192); Athens
  1342.

Footnote 238:

  Athens 1962 (Leto about to bring forth, assisted by Eileithyia).

Footnote 239:

  B.M. B 168, 213; _Mus. Greg._ ii. 39, 1 a; _Él. Cér._ ii. 2. Nyx
  (Night) was similarly represented on the Kypselos chest (Paus. v. 18,
  1).

Footnote 240:

  Reinach, ii. 310.

Footnote 241:

  Berlin 2212 = Overbeck, _Kunstmythol._ iv. p. 378; Bibl. Nat. 306 =
  _Él. Cér._ ii. 1 A.

Footnote 242:

  Berlin 2645 = Reinach, i. 397 (Apollo on omphalos, with hind);
  Reinach, ii. 26 (Louvre F 297), 28 (Bibl. Nat. 443), i. 184 (Fig.
  116); B.M. E 502 (omphalos); Athens 1362 (by Mys, a fine example).

Footnote 243:

  Reinach, ii. 29; B.M. B 215, 245; Petersburg 9 = Reinach, ii. 24
  (Apollo crowned by woman); _Él. Cér._ ii. 39; Bibl. Nat. 428; Munich
  157.

Footnote 244:

  B.M. B 212, 262; Reinach, ii. 23, 323; _Él. Cér._ ii. 30 (?), 36 C:
  and cf. _Bourguignon Sale Cat._ 41.

Footnote 245:

  B.M. B 238; Reinach, ii. 24 (Munich 47), 25, 30; Naples 1891 = _Él.
  Cér._ ii. 35; Munich 609 = Reinach, ii. 42.

Footnote 246:

  B.M. F 311, 399.

Footnote 247:

  B.M. E 785.

Footnote 248:

  Reinach, ii. 183.

Footnote 249:

  _Ibid._ ii. 25 (?), 32, 72–73; B.M. B 203, and _Wiener Vorl._ 1889,
  pl. 6, 1; and see generally Overbeck, _Kunstmythol._ iv. p. 51.

Footnote 250:

  B.M. B 199–201, 211, etc.; Reinach, ii. 72; Berlin 1827 (all B.F.).

Footnote 251:

  B.M. B 6; see Vol. I. p. 344.

Footnote 252:

  Reinach, i. 253; _Él. Cér._ ii. 47–48 (also Iris).

Footnote 253:

  Naples 1762 = Millingen-Reinach, 29.

Footnote 254:

  B.M. B 259, 261; E 323, 415; _Él. Cér._ ii. 13 (= Reinach, ii. 27).
  In some of these Artemis may be intended.

Footnote 255:

  Berlin 2388; _Él. Cér._ ii. 79, 80, 83, 86 (a fine example); Jatta
  1538 = Reinach, i. 526; Helbig, 133 = _Mus. Greg._ ii. 15, 2; and cf.
  _Boston Mus. Report_ for 1898, No. 54 (A. as a neat-herd?).

Footnote 256:

  B.M. B 197, 298; B.M. B 257, Reinach, ii. 154, and Millingen-Reinach,
  44.

Footnote 257:

  _Wiener Vorl._ C. 7, 3 = Roscher, ii. 842.

Footnote 258:

  B.M. B 195, 255–56, 258; F 77; Reinach, ii. 23.

Footnote 259:

  Petersburg 1807 = Reinach, i. 8 = Baumeister, i. p. 104, fig. 110.

Footnote 260:

  Munich 62 = Reinach, ii. 75.

Footnote 261:

  B.M. B 179.

Footnote 262:

  Reinach, ii. 31.

Footnote 263:

  Reinach, ii. 287 = _Él. Cér._ ii. 62 (inscribed ?????S: see below, p.
  78).

Footnote 264:

  Millin-Reinach, i. 54.

Footnote 265:

  B.F.: _Ant. Denkm._ i. 22. R.F.: B.M. E 81; Reinach, i. 227 = Vol. I.
  p. 442. Late: Jatta 424 = Reinach, i. 463; Naples 3246 = Roscher,
  iii. 407 (Niobe at grave of children).

Footnote 266:

  B.F.: Reinach, i. 244 (= Louvre E 864), 245; Bibl. Nat. 171 = _ibid._
  ii. 252. R.F.: B.M. E 278.

Footnote 267:

  Louvre G 42 = Reinach, ii. 26.

Footnote 268:

  B.M. E 64 (= Reinach, i. 111), E 170 (= _E.g._ i. 185); _Él. Cér._
  ii. 21; and see Millin-Reinach, i. 71.

Footnote 269:

  Munich 745 = Reinach, i. 67 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, 16: see
  also Bibl. Nat. 171 = Reinach, ii. 253.

Footnote 270:

  B.M. F 151.

Footnote 271:

  Reinach, i. 375.

Footnote 272:

  Helbig 227 = Reinach, i. 357; _E.g._ ii. 259 = Bibl. Nat. 820 (?).

Footnote 273:

  B.M. B 147.

Footnote 274:

  Naples 690, 3245.

Footnote 275:

  Reinach, i. 355.

Footnote 276:

  Millin-Reinach, ii. 25.

Footnote 277:

  Reinach, ii. 297.

Footnote 278:

  Petersburg 1777 = Reinach, i. 153.

Footnote 279:

  See below, p. 103.

Footnote 280:

  B.M. F 479.

Footnote 281:

  Reinach, ii. 56, 3: see p. 97.

Footnote 282:

  _Ibid._ i. 233.

Footnote 283:

  Berlin 1732 = Reinach, ii. 66.

Footnote 284:

  Reinach, ii. 69.

Footnote 285:

  See p. 106, note 1219, for B.F. scenes; for R.F. (in Olympos),
  Reinach, i. 222 and ii. 76.

Footnote 286:

  Berlin 2634.

Footnote 287:

  Reinach, i. 388.

Footnote 288:

  Overbeck, _Her. Bildw._ pl. 2, 11 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1889, 9, 6.

Footnote 289:

  B.M. E 696.

Footnote 290:

  Berlin 2633; Reinach, ii. 87 (?); _Wiener Vorl._ E. 11 = _Jahrbuch_,
  1894, p. 252.

Footnote 291:

  B.M. F 159; François vase; Helbig 106 = Reinach, ii. 101; _Wiener
  Vorl._ vi. 7 (Duris in Louvre); B.M. E 468, Helbig 232 = Reinach, ii.
  59; Reinach, i. 218.

Footnote 292:

  Reinach i. 105 (Naples 3223) and i. 504; B.M. F 166, Berlin 3256,
  Naples 1984 = Reinach, i. 390, 2, and _Anzeiger_, 1890, p. 90
  (Berlin).

Footnote 293:

  Reinach, i. 321.

Footnote 294:

  _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1895, p. 39 (Berlin).

Footnote 295:

  B.M. E 336: cf. Reinach, i. 218 and Overbeck, _Kunstmythol._ iv. p.
  15.

Footnote 296:

  _Röm. Mitth._ 1888, pl. 1; Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 67, 2; _E.g._
  p. 602 ff. (cultus-statue of the moon-goddess, Artemis Munychia); and
  see note 299.

Footnote 297:

  Vol. I. p. 289; Berlin 301 = Reinach, i. 380; Naples 304 = Reinach,
  i. 380; Baumeister, i. p. 132, fig. 139; François vase; _Arch.
  Anzeiger_, 1890, p. 2 (Karlsruhe).

Footnote 298:

  Athens 462 = Reinach, i. 517: see $1$2 1892, p. 219 ff.

Footnote 299:

  _Él. Cér._ ii. 7 (with hind and lyre); Bibl. Nat. 365 = Reinach, ii.
  257 (drawing arrow from quiver); Bibl. Nat. 491 = _Gaz. Arch._ 1885,
  pl. 32; Reinach, i. 494 (with two dogs); Froehner, _Musées de
  France_, pl. 4.

Footnote 300:

  _Él. Cér._ ii. 8, 43; Naples 3253 = Reinach, i. 194; B.M. F 274;
  Reinach, ii. 228.

Footnote 301:

  B.M. E 432.

Footnote 302:

  Millin-Reinach, ii. 77.

Footnote 303:

  B.M. E 262 = Reinach, ii. 45; and see _Él. Cér._ ii. 9 (in Louvre).

Footnote 304:

  Naples 2200 = Reinach, i. 379; Berlin 3164; Reinach, ii. 16 (?).

Footnote 305:

  B.F.: Athens 882 = Heydemann, _Gr. Vas._ pl. 8, 3; _Él. Cér._ ii. 103
  C. Late: B.M. F 176, F 480 (Etruscan); Berlin 3239 = _Él. Cér._ ii.
  103 B; Reinach, i. 229 and 250 (the former of these now at Boston).

Footnote 306:

  Athens 835 = _Ath. Mitth._ 1890, pl. 8.

Footnote 307:

  B.M. F 159.

Footnote 308:

  Reinach, i. 104, 133, 158, 504.

Footnote 309:

  Athens 1921 = Reinach, i. 511.

Footnote 310:

  B.M. B 195, B 316, E 255; Bibl. Nat. 251 = Reinach, ii. 252.

Footnote 311:

  Reinach, ii. 4.

Footnote 312:

  _Ibid._ i. 132.

Footnote 313:

  B.M. B 197, B 298; Reinach, ii. 154: cf. B.M. B 257.

Footnote 314:

  _Él. Cér._ ii. 90.

Footnote 315:

  See above, p. 15.

Footnote 316:

  B.M. E 410.

Footnote 317:

  Reinach, ii. 32.

Footnote 318:

  B.M. B 203.

Footnote 319:

  Reinach, i. 499.

Footnote 320:

  B.M. B 231; Reinach, i. 233.

Footnote 321:

  B.M. F 479.

Footnote 322:

  B.M. B 320; Reinach, ii. 72; in Olympos, B.M. B 379, Berlin 2278, and
  Reinach, ii. 76.

Footnote 323:

  _Wiener Vorl._ vi. 7 = Duris kylix in Louvre.

Footnote 324:

  Millin-Reinach, ii. 25.

Footnote 325:

  _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1895, p. 36.

Footnote 326:

  See note 326 on p. 17.

Footnote 327:

  B.M. E 47; Berlin 2293.

Footnote 328:

  B.M. B 147, B 244; B.M. E 410; Bibl. Nat. 444.

Footnote 329:

  E 467 and D 4.

Footnote 330:

  Berlin 2537 = Reinach, i. 208; _ibid._ i. 66 (Munich 345), 113.

Footnote 331:

  Berlin 2294; and see below, p. 130.

Footnote 332:

  B.M. B 507; _Él. Cér._ i. 51: cf. p. 171.

Footnote 333:

  Bibl. Nat. 820 = Reinach, ii. 259 (?).

Footnote 334:

  Reinach, i. 330.

Footnote 335:

  B.M. B 302, and cf. F 68.

Footnote 336:

  B.M. B 252: see _Arch. Journ._ ii. p. 67.

Footnote 337:

  Berlin 2957 = _Él. Cér._ i. 88 (Etruscan).

Footnote 338:

  B.M. D 4; E 467.

Footnote 339:

  Plate L.; and see p. 24.

Footnote 340:

  B.M. E 182; Petersburg 1792 = Reinach, i. 1.

Footnote 341:

  Berlin 2537; B.M. E 372; Munich 345 = Reinach, i. 66; _Wiener Vorl._
  iii. 2 = Reinach, i. 113.

Footnote 342:

  Athens 1962.

Footnote 343:

  Reinach, i. 126: for other examples see p. 122.

Footnote 344:

  Bibl. Nat. 216 = _Él. Cér._ iv. 96 (Ares); Bibl. Nat. 820 = Reinach,
  ii. 259 (Hephaistos).

Footnote 345:

  B.M. E 268; Bibl. Nat. 220 (= Reinach, ii. 211) and 229; and see
  under Hermes, p. 52, note 591.

Footnote 346:

  Reinach, i. 11.

Footnote 347:

  B.M. B 552; Berlin 2179 = _Wiener Vorl._ iii. 6; _Mus. Greg._ ii. 38,
  2_E.g._ (with Poseidon and Dionysos).

Footnote 348:

  Reinach, i. 463.

Footnote 349:

  Berlin 2418 = Baumeister, ii. p. 1001, fig. 1209: cf. B.M. E 490 and
  Reinach, i. 342 (in Boston); Reinach, i. 175, 510, 511 (Athens 1921).

Footnote 350:

  _Él. Cér._ i. 68, 76 A; with N. sacrificing, _Boston Mus. Report_,
  1898, No. 51.

Footnote 351:

  B.M. E 324 (Hebe?); Reinach, ii. 323 (Hebe?); _ibid._ 324 (Iris).

Footnote 352:

  Vienna 329: cf. _Él. Cér._ i. 82 (A. with Z., but not pouring
  libation).

Footnote 353:

  See p. 106 for these scenes, in which she is almost invariably
  present.

Footnote 354:

  B.M. B 198, B 498; Helbig 93 = _$1_ ii. 54, 2.

Footnote 355:

  B.M. D 14; Berlin 2626 = _Coll. Sabouroff_, i. 67; Millin-Reinach,
  ii. 41.

Footnote 356:

  Reinach, ii. 75 (doubtful).

Footnote 357:

  Stackelberg, pl. 15.

Footnote 358:

  _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1898, p. 51 (vase in Boston).

Footnote 359:

  B.M. E 48; Berlin 2179 = _Wiener Vorl._ iii. 6; _Boston Mus. Report_,
  1900, No. 25; Reinach, i. 55, 6 (Petersburg 116), 91, 421 (Petersburg
  2012), ii. 271; and see _Wiener Vorl._ E. 12, 2.

Footnote 360:

  B.M. B 155, 248, 380, E 181, 493, F 83; Bibl. Nat. 277 = Reinach, i.
  290; _Mon. Grecs_, 1878, pl. 2.

Footnote 361:

  B.M. E 81; Petersburg 2189 = Reinach, i. 5(?).

Footnote 362:

  Reinach, i. 108, 195, 331.

Footnote 363:

  _Ibid._ i. 102, 226.

Footnote 364:

  B.M. E 696.

Footnote 365:

  Reinach, i. 184.

Footnote 366:

  B.M. E 155.

Footnote 367:

  Reinach, i. 480.

Footnote 368:

  _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1898, p. 586.

Footnote 369:

  Reinach, i. 231.

Footnote 370:

  _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1895, p. 39 (Berlin).

Footnote 371:

  Reinach, i. 363.

Footnote 372:

  _Ibid._ ii. 296: see pp. 77, 128.

Footnote 373:

  At meeting of Paris and Helen, Athens 1942 = Reinach, i. 402; at
  combat of Ajax and Hector, _Wiener Vorl._ vi. 7 (Duris in Louvre); at
  dispute over the arms, B.M. E 69; and see for other instances,
  Reinach, i. 3, 82, 138, 174, 218; ii. 59, 266.

Footnote 374:

  Reinach, ii. 110.

Footnote 375:

  Vase in Boston: see 1899 Report, No. 16.

Footnote 376:

  See below, p. 124.

Footnote 377:

  B.M. B 541, E 160.

Footnote 378:

  Reinach, i. 5 (?), 158, 390; _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1890, p. 90 (Berlin).

Footnote 379:

  Berlin 2313 = Reinach, i. 416 = _Wiener Vorl._ vii. 4, 3.

Footnote 380:

  B.M. E 316 = Plate XXXVI.

Footnote 381:

  Reinach, ii. 123 (= Munich 1185), 262 (= Bibl. Nat. 369).

Footnote 382:

  B.M. E 299.

Footnote 383:

  Berlin 1846 = Reinach, ii. 30 (before Dionysos).

Footnote 384:

  Reinach, i. 342.

Footnote 385:

  _Ibid._ ii. 166; _Boston Mus. Report_, 1896, No. 1.

Footnote 386:

  _Él. Cér._ i. 83.

Footnote 387:

  Berlin 2415 = Reinach, i. 343 (the Trojan horse?).

Footnote 388:

  Vol. I. p. 223, Fig. 72.

Footnote 389:

  Reinach, i. 501.

Footnote 390:

  _Ibid._ ii. 44.

Footnote 391:

  B.M. E 515, 519.

Footnote 392:

  _Röm. Mitth._ 1897, pl. 12; Bibl. Nat. 260; Louvre F 380.

Footnote 393:

  B.M. B 203; Reinach, ii. 73; with Poseidon, Athens 836; with Hermes,
  Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ pl. 4, 1.

Footnote 394:

  Millin-Reinach, ii. 25.

Footnote 395:

  Reinach, ii. 125, 130; Bibl. Nat. 232, 256 = Rein. ii. 254.

Footnote 396:

  _Ibid._ i. 44.

Footnote 397:

  Bibl. Nat. 260.

Footnote 398:

  B.M. B 242, 379, 541, E 160, 470, F 160, 209, 278; Munich 65 =
  Reinach, i. 76; Naples 2422 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, 34.

Footnote 399:

  See below, p. 133.

Footnote 400:

  B.M. E 494, E 696; E 716 (moulded vase); and cf. B 611 (Nikephoros).

Footnote 401:

  B.M. B 222, E 305 (Pl. XXXVI.), E 324, E 515; _Él. Cér._ i. 82; Bibl.
  Nat. 219; _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1898, p. 586.

Footnote 402:

  For a fine example of Athena Promachos see Athens 1169 = Benndorf,
  _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ 31, 2.

Footnote 403:

  See Vol. I. p. 389, and Plates XXXIII., XXXIV.; also the B.M.
  examples B 130–46, 602–12.

Footnote 404:

  _Él. Cér._ i. 67.

Footnote 405:

  B.M. B 80; Berlin 1686 = Rayet-Collignon, pl. 7; Reinach, ii. 122;
  Athens 1858 = Reinach, i. 396 (identified as Athena Nike or Onka);
  for the trophy-like form of the figure on the last-named cf. the
  coins of Pergamon inscribed ?????? ????f????: see also for a curious
  subject Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ pl. 31, fig. 1.

Footnote 406:

  B.M. D 22; Bibl. Nat. 472 = Reinach, i. 131, 4.

Footnote 407:

  B.M. B 147; Reinach, i. 156.

Footnote 408:

  B.M. B 617; Berlin 2531; Bibl. Nat. 573 = Reinach, ii. 256; Athens
  1259 = Reinach, i. 506.

Footnote 409:

  See p. 101; for his subsequent attack on Athena, _Arch. Anzeiger_,
  1898, p. 51 (vase in Boston).

Footnote 410:

  B.M. E 67, E 82; Reinach, i. 203.

Footnote 411:

  B.M. B 191, B 228.

Footnote 412:

  _Amer. Journ. of Arch._ 1896, p. 6, fig. 4.

Footnote 413:

  Bibl. Nat. 216 (= _Él. Cér._ iv. 96) and 229.

Footnote 414:

  _Él. Cér._ iv. 94–95; B.M. E 82, and Berlin 2278 (in assemblies of
  gods); _Gaz. Arch._ 1876, pl. 34.

Footnote 415:

  B.M. B 551; and see Athens 903.

Footnote 416:

  _Él. Cér._ iv. 98.

Footnote 417:

  B.M. E 467.

Footnote 418:

  B.M. E 155.

Footnote 419:

  Reinach, i. 463.

Footnote 420:

  B.M. B 379; Berlin 1961 (= Reinach, ii. 43) and 2278; Bibl. Nat. 254.

Footnote 421:

  Reinach, ii. 91.

Footnote 422:

  _Él. Cér._ iv. 99.

Footnote 423:

  _Röm. Mittheil._ 1899, pl. 7: cf. Paus. vii. 8.

Footnote 424:

  B.M. F 108, 373 (?); Millingen-Reinach, 26; Reinach, i. 119, 265,
  325, 479 (?); _Él. Cér._ iv. 66 (?).

Footnote 425:

  Reinach, i. 499 = Naples S.A. 702; also Naples 2900 =
  Millingen-Reinach, 41 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1653, fig. 1714.

Footnote 426:

  Reinach, i. 156.

Footnote 427:

  B.M. D 2; _J.H.S._ xii. pl. 13; _Jahrb._ 1886, pl. 11, 2; Berlin 2636
  (_Él. Cér._ iv. 5) and 2688 (= Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ 37,
  3); Reinach, ii. 7, 183. Late: B.M. F 240, 556.

Footnote 428:

  Berlin 2635 = _Jahrbuch_, 1889, p. 208 = Roscher, iii. 1514.

Footnote 429:

  Berlin 2660.

Footnote 430:

  _Él. Cér._ iv. 6.

Footnote 431:

  _Arch. Anzeiger_. 1898, p. 137 (Dresden vase): cf. Paul, _E.g._ Fest.
  iii. _E.g._ Cytherea and the B.M. terracottas D 89–91.

Footnote 432:

  B.M. E 712, 775; Athens 1944; Reinach, i. 124, ii. 323; Inghirami,
  _Vasi Fitt._ 324.

Footnote 433:

  Reinach, i. 353.

Footnote 434:

  B.M. E 230, F 311; Athens 1588 = Roscher, iii. p. 2119 (Fig. 117);
  Reinach, i. 39, ii. (290; _Burlington Fine Arts Club Cat._ 1903), p.
  108, No. 46.

Footnote 435:

  Reinach, ii. 301, 320; Berlin 2707 = _Coll. Sabouroff_, pl. 62, 2.

Footnote 436:

  Petersburg 1983 = Reinach, i. 15.

Footnote 437:

  Froehner, _Musées de France_, pl. 13, 4.

Footnote 438:

  Berlin 4126 = Reinach, i. 128.

Footnote 439:

  B.M. E 699 = _J.H.S._ xi. pl. 4.

Footnote 440:

  B.M. E 224, 697, 698, 775; Berlin 3257 (with Eunomia and Euthymia at
  marriage of Herakles and Hebe); Naples S.A. 316 = Reinach, i. 477
  (with Eukleia, Klymene, and Pannychis); _Mon. Grecs_, 1889–90, pls.
  9–10 (without names); Fig. 117 = Athens 1588 = Roscher, iii. p. 2119
  (with Kore, Hebe, Eudaimon, Harmonia, and others).

Footnote 441:

  Reinach, ii. 315; Millin-Reinach, i. 65.

Footnote 442:

  Reinach, i. 198.

Footnote 443:

  B.M. E 230, E 289, and cf. F 311; Baumeister, i. p. 618, fig. 687 (?
  see p. 57, note 710).

Footnote 444:

  _Él. Cér._ iv. 38.

Footnote 445:

  Stackelberg, pl. 30: cf. B.M. E 697.

Footnote 446:

  Reinach, i. 129; B.M. F 258; Bibl. Nat. 1005, 1133 (head of A.
  adorned by two Erotes).

Footnote 447:

  See above, p. 17.

Footnote 448:

  B.M. E 15; Reinach, i. 156(B.F.).

Footnote 449:

  B.M. B 197.

Footnote 450:

  _Mon. Grecs_, 1875, pls. 1–2.

Footnote 451:

  Petersburg 350, 525 = Reinach, i. 11–12; _Rev. Arch._ xxxvi. (1900),
  p. 93.

Footnote 452:

  B.M. F 270, 332; Reinach, i. 355–56, 479.

Footnote 453:

  B.M. B 203; F 90.

Footnote 454:

  Reinach, i. 124, 465; ii. 181.

Footnote 455:

  Berlin 3164; Reinach, i. 111, 4 and 416.

Footnote 456:

  Berlin 3239.

Footnote 457:

  Reinach, i. 405, 452 (Berlin 2950); ii. 197.

Footnote 458:

  Helbig 118 = Overbeck, _Kunstmythol. Atlas_, 6, 13.

Footnote 459:

  Reinach, i. 526.

Footnote 460:

  Reinach, i. 481; Berlin 2278; Furtwaengler-Reichhold, 20; at marriage
  with Hebe, Berlin 3257.

Footnote 461:

  B.M. E 224.

Footnote 462:

  Reinach, i. 91.

Footnote 463:

  B.M. E 224.

Footnote 464:

  Naples 3226 = Millin-Reinach, ii. 7 (Kadmos); B.M. F 271 (Pelops);
  Reinach, i. 188, and _Jahrbuch_, 1896, pl. 2 (Perseus); Naples S.A.
  11 = Reinach, i. 401 (Meleager).

Footnote 465:

  See below, p. 122.

Footnote 466:

  Millingen-Reinach, 43: cf. Berlin 3244 for another possible Anchises.

Footnote 467:

  B.M. E 424; François vase.

Footnote 468:

  Reinach, i. 437.

Footnote 469:

  B.M. E 73; _Tyszkiewicz Coll._ pl. 18 (now in Boston).

Footnote 470:

  B.M. F 209.

Footnote 471:

  Reinach, i. 222, and cf. i. 437 and B.M. F 278 (statue of A.); Noel
  des Vergers, _Étrurie_, iii. pl. 39.

Footnote 472:

  B.M. B 173, 280; Reinach, ii. 116.

Footnote 473:

  B.M. E 289; Reinach, i. 7, 15, 126; _Wiener Vorl._ A. 10, 3.

Footnote 474:

  B.M. F 108 (anointing Adonis’ hair).

Footnote 475:

  B.M. E 129.

Footnote 476:

  Zeus and Danaë: B.M. E 711; Europa: B.M. E 231, F 184, Naples 3218
  (Eros on bull); Reinach, i. 22, 24.

Footnote 477:

  Reinach, i. 449.

Footnote 478:

  B.M. F 272, 279; _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1890, p. 89 (Berlin).

Footnote 479:

  B.M. E 424; Plate XXXIX. fig. 2.

Footnote 480:

  B.M. F 271, 331; Reinach, i. 235.

Footnote 481:

  Reinach, i. 9, 402 (Athens 1942), 437.

Footnote 482:

  Reinach, i. 156, ii. 309.

Footnote 483:

  _Ibid._ i. 66.

Footnote 484:

  B.M. E 227.

Footnote 485:

  B.M. F 107.

Footnote 486:

  Reinach, i. 22.

Footnote 487:

  B.M. F 270; Reinach, i. 355, 455 (with Orpheus).

Footnote 488:

  Reinach, i. 66; _E.g._ i. 100, 167; B.M. F 152, 194; Gerhard, _Akad.
  Abhandl._ pl. 7, fig. 1 = Inghirami, _Vasi Fitt._ 394 (with Helios
  and Selene ?see p. 79, note 954); B.M. F 74 and F 102 (Herakles).

Footnote 489:

  B.M. F 311: cf. F 399.

Footnote 490:

  B.M. F 90.

Footnote 491:

  B.M. F 69: cf. _Bourguignon Sale Cat._ 41.

Footnote 492:

  B.M. E 228, 428, 435, 703; F 58, 60, 72, 382; Millin-Reinach, ii. 16
  (offers wreath to D.).

Footnote 493:

  Millin-Reinach, i. 20.

Footnote 494:

  Reinach, i. 525, 526.

Footnote 495:

  B.M. E 225, 229, 705; F 138, 308, 310, 332.

Footnote 496:

  Reinach, i. 206.

Footnote 497:

  B.M. E 126, 189, 191.

Footnote 498:

  B.M. F 48.

Footnote 499:

  Athens 1946 = Dumont-Pottier, i. pl. 21, 5.

Footnote 500:

  B.M. E 205 (?); Reinach, i. 412.

Footnote 501:

  B.M. F 123 (cf. p. 50, note 547); Reinach, ii. 315 = Baumeister, ii.
  p. 780, fig. 834.

Footnote 502:

  B.M. E 704; E 721.

Footnote 503:

  Reinach, i. 232.

Footnote 504:

  _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1899, p. 158 = _Burlington Club Cat._ 1903, p.
  97, No. 11.

Footnote 505:

  B.M. E 397, Reinach, ii. 142; B.M. E 217, 360, 702, Reinach, ii. 315.

Footnote 506:

  Reinach, ii. 317; Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 22, fig. 1 (? see p. 80,
  note 970).

Footnote 507:

  Reinach, ii. 191.

Footnote 508:

  Naples 2961.

Footnote 509:

  B.M. E 297.

Footnote 510:

  Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 27, p. 262.

Footnote 511:

  Petersburg 1181 = Reinach, ii. 318: cf. Reinach, i. 250, and _Arch.
  Anzeiger_, 1890, p. 89 (see p. 46, note 478).

Footnote 512:

  F 220.

Footnote 513:

  B.M. E 293; Reinach, i. 465.

Footnote 514:

  B.M. E 652.

Footnote 515:

  Bibl. Nat. 366 = _Él. Cér._ iv. 51.

Footnote 516:

  B.M. E 526, 528.

Footnote 517:

  Reinach, i. 479; _Ibid._ i. 57.

Footnote 518:

  Reinach, i. 55, Millin-Reinach, ii. 59; Reinach, ii. 324, _Él. Cér._
  iv. 53; Reinach, i. 347; _E.g._ ii. 248, B.M. F 555.

Footnote 519:

  B.M. F 579 = Fig. 118; Reinach, i. 277.

Footnote 520:

  Baumeister, iii. p. 1573, fig. 1633; B.M. E 501.

Footnote 521:

  B.M. E 706, Naples 2872 = Reinach, ii. 169; B.M. E 296, _Él. Cér._
  iv. 49; B.M. F 221.

Footnote 522:

  B.M. E 241, Reinach, i. 229, ii. 302; _Él. Cér._ iv. 50.

Footnote 523:

  B.M. E 213; Reinach, i. 36; B.M. F 68, F 441.

Footnote 524:

  B.M. F 223, 279, 373: cf. Theocr. ii. 30 (??µß??); Hor. _Epod._ xvii.
  7 (_turbo_).

Footnote 525:

  B.M. E 118, 571; F 219, 257, Reinach, i. 312 (dove), _Él. Cér._ iv.
  49 (cock).

Footnote 526:

  B.M. E 13; F 294, 340, 378; Reinach, i. 528, B.M. F 17, 308, 409.

Footnote 527:

  B.M. F 132, 225, 278, 280, 258 (two Erotes holding wreath); F 165,
  176, 329, 389; F 310; F 234, 257, 306, 414, 440; E 518.

Footnote 528:

  B.M. F 349; E 242, F 391; Baumeister, i. p. 498, fig. 540; B.M. F
  387, 481; F 294, 382, Millin-Reinach, i. 20 (torch and bow); B.M. F
  443; E 239; F 308, 414 (Plate XLIV.).

Footnote 529:

  B.M. F 420, 434; F 456; F 13, 219, 292, 325; F 31, 280, 317, 323; F
  37; E 293, 388; F 31, 63, 234, 278; F 280, 315, 337, 373.

Footnote 530:

  Naples S.A. 11 = Reinach, i. 401 (at death of Meleager).

Footnote 531:

  _Abhandl. d. k. sächs. Gesellsch._ viii. pl. 1, fig. 1 (with Sappho).

Footnote 532:

  B.M. E 222; also at the toilet of Aphrodite (Fig. 117 above).

Footnote 533:

  Raoul-Rochette, _Mon. Inéd._ 8.

Footnote 534:

  Petersburg 350 = Reinach, i. 12; _Rev. Arch._ xxxvi. (1900),  p. 93;
  Reinach, i. 124.

Footnote 535:

  Reinach, i. 188.

Footnote 536:

  B.M. E 224.

Footnote 537:

  Reinach, i. 437.

Footnote 538:

  B.M. E 224.

Footnote 539:

  Noel des Vergers, _Étrurie_, iii. pl. 39.

Footnote 540:

  Naples 2900 = Millingen-Reinach, 41.

Footnote 541:

  _Röm. Mitth._ 1899, pl. 7.

Footnote 542:

  Reinach, i. 526.

Footnote 543:

  Roscher, iii. p. 1811.

Footnote 544:

  B.M. E 440.

Footnote 545:

  Berlin 2633.

Footnote 546:

  B.M. E 226.

Footnote 547:

  Reinach, ii. 302: see also _Boston Mus. Report_, 1900, No. 11, and
  Jatta 1093 = Heydemann, _Satyr- u. Bakchennamen_, pl. 1 (holding
  grapes).

Footnote 548:

  Munich 234 = Reinach, i. 298 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1571, fig. 1632.

Footnote 549:

  Berlin 3257.

Footnote 550:

  Reinach, ii. 200.

Footnote 551:

  Jatta 1093.

Footnote 552:

  Naples 3240 = Reinach, i. 114.

Footnote 553:

  B.M. B 32; Louvre G 10; Reinach, ii. 276.

Footnote 554:

  Berlin 4003 = _Coll. Sabouroff_, i. pl. 50.

Footnote 555:

  B.M. E 58.

Footnote 556:

  Louvre F 159; _Él. Cér._ iii. 87.

Footnote 557:

  Berlin 2727 and Reinach, i. 159; Berlin 1881.

Footnote 558:

  B.M. B 549.

Footnote 559:

  _Él. Cér._ iii. 73 (Hermaios), 76.

Footnote 560:

  Millin-Reinach, i. 51.

Footnote 561:

  Reinach, ii. 276.

Footnote 562:

  B.M. B 32; Athens 592 = _Ath. Mitth._ 1893, pl. 2.

Footnote 563:

  B.M. B 332.

Footnote 564:

  Vienna 321 (cf. Ar. _Ach._ 729 ff.).

Footnote 565:

  Reinach, ii. 25.

Footnote 566:

  _Él. Cér._ iii. 14 and 75.

Footnote 567:

  Louvre E 702 = Reinach, i. 354; Helbig, 227 = Reinach, i. 357 =
  Baumeister, i. p. 680, fig. 741 (Fig. 119).

Footnote 568:

  Reinach, ii. 25; De Witte, _Coll. à l’Hôtel Lambert_, pl. 1.

Footnote 569:

  Bibl. Nat. 820 = Reinach, ii. 259.

Footnote 570:

  _Él. Cér._ iii. 93; Millin-Reinach, i. 70; Reinach, ii. 330.

Footnote 571:

  B.M. F 237, and see above, p. 15.

Footnote 572:

  Berlin 1702 (Hermes Kyllenios), and see p. 15.

Footnote 573:

  B.M. B 197; Reinach, ii. 266.

Footnote 574:

  See above, p. 17.

Footnote 575:

  Reinach, i. 472.

Footnote 576:

  B.M. E 65.

Footnote 577:

  See p. 20.

Footnote 578:

  Louvre A 478 (_Hermes_, 1898, p. 638); _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1898,
  p. 586.

Footnote 579:

  Reinach, i. 234.

Footnote 580:

  _Ibid._ i. 124.

Footnote 581:

  _Ibid._ i. 499.

Footnote 582:

  _Ibid._ i. 244; i. 463; i. 175.

Footnote 583:

  _Ibid._ ii. 4.

Footnote 584:

  B.M. B 203 (Athena); Reinach, ii. 22, 26, 73; Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic.
  Vasenb._ 4, 1.

Footnote 585:

  B.M. B 340; E 44, 459; Reinach, ii. 125, 152, 275.

Footnote 586:

  Athens 1345 = _J.H.S._ xix. pl. 10; Millin-Reinach, ii. 37 (Lasimos
  in Louvre).

Footnote 587:

  Millin-Reinach, ii. 44.

Footnote 588:

  Reinach, i. 388.

Footnote 589:

  _Ibid._ i. 380.

Footnote 590:

  B.M. E 467; _J.H.S._ xxi. pl. 1.

Footnote 591:

  See generally under those deities; for H. and Athena: B.M. B 144,
  Reinach, i. 257, ii. 42 (Panathenaic); B.M. E 268, Reinach, i. 520
  (Athens 477), ii. 25, 211 (Bibl. Nat. 220).

Footnote 592:

  Berlin 2635 = _Jahrbuch_, 1889, p. 208.

Footnote 593:

  B.M. B 257, 259, 267, 302 (banqueting); Berlin 2160 (with the Satyr
  Oreimachos); Reinach, i. 129 (playing lyre).

Footnote 594:

  B.M. B 424, E 492; Petersburg 1792, 1793 (= Reinach, i. 1 and 3);
  Helbig, 103 = Rayet and Collignon, p. 223; Reinach, i. 93, ii. 310;
  and see _Ath. Mitth._ 1889, pl. 1, p. 1 ff, and p. 55, note 642.

Footnote 595:

  B.M. B 230; Oxford 222; Reinach, ii. 29.

Footnote 596:

  See p. 69.

Footnote 597:

  B.M. F 277; Reinach, i. 99: cf. _Rev. Arch._ xxxvi. (1900), p. 93.

Footnote 598:

  See p. 28; also Naples 1989 = _Él. Cér._ iii. 91, and Reinach, i. 522.

Footnote 599:

  Reinach, i. 456; Berlin 2455; Munich 209 = Fig. 122, p. 70.

Footnote 600:

  Athens 1093 = Roscher, ii. p. 2678; Berlin 2991.

Footnote 601:

  Louvre F 60.

Footnote 602:

  Bibl. Nat. 269.

Footnote 603:

  _J.H.S._ xx. p. 101: cf. the story of Pandora’s “box,” and see Vol.
  I. p. 152 and p. 75 below.

Footnote 604:

  Munich 611 = Reinach, i. 419.

Footnote 605:

  Reinach, i. 389, ii. 32, 70.

Footnote 606:

  B.M. B 167, B 301; B 229.

Footnote 607:

  Reinach, i. 297, 323, ii. 70, 74–75.

Footnote 608:

  B.M. B 166, 318, 379; Louvre F 116–117; Reinach, i. 222, 368, ii. 76.

Footnote 609:

  Bibl. Nat. 172; Reinach, i. 91, ii. 271.

Footnote 610:

  B.M. B 248, B 280, E 493; Bibl. Nat. 277 = Reinach, i. 290; _E.g._
  ii. 48; _Mon. Grecs_, 1878, pl. 2 (represents an earlier episode).

Footnote 611:

  Bibl. Nat. 224.

Footnote 612:

  See p. 122.

Footnote 613:

  Athens 966.

Footnote 614:

  Reinach, i. 89, 144.

Footnote 615:

  _Ibid._ i. 138, ii. 99.

Footnote 616:

  _Wiener Vorl._ 1890–91, 10 (Louvre).

Footnote 617:

  _Él. Cér._ iii. 78–81; Bibl. Nat. 839: see Roscher, i. p. 2393.

Footnote 618:

  B.M. B 362, 627, E 585; Berlin 1928, 2172; Schreiber-Anderson, 16, 8,
  and 14, 3.

Footnote 619:

  B.M. B 345, E 444; Berlin 2278; Reinach, i. 203; _Ath. Mitth._ 1889,
  pl. 1.

Footnote 620:

  _Forman Sale Cat._ 364.




                             CHAPTER XIII
                  _DIONYSOS AND MISCELLANEOUS DEITIES_

    Dionysos and his associates—Ariadne, Maenads, and Satyrs—Names of
      Satyrs and Maenads—The Nether World—General representations and
      isolated subjects—Charon, Erinnyes, Hekate, and
      Thanatos—Cosmogonic deities—Gaia and Pandora—Prometheus and
      Atlas—Iris and Hebe—Personifications—Sun, Moon, Stars, and
      Dawn—Winds—Cities and countries—The Muses—Victory—Abstract
      ideas—Descriptive names.

                    § 1. DIONYSOS AND HIS ASSOCIATES

The most important deity in Greek mythology outside the Olympian circle
is undoubtedly =Dionysos=; but the part that is played by him and his
attendant train in Greek art is out of all proportion even to this, at
least in the vase-paintings. Apart from what we may regard as strictly
mythological subjects, such as the Birth of Dionysos and scenes in
which other gods or heroes are introduced, the number and variety of
the themes are so great that an exhaustive enumeration is quite
impossible; nor indeed would it repay the trouble to give a complete
list of what may for convenience be termed Dionysiac scenes. Suffice it
to say that they occur with equal frequency on the vases of all periods
from the middle of the sixth century onwards.

The personages with whom we have to deal in this section are, besides
Dionysos himself, his spouse Ariadne, Pan, with his “double” Aegipan,
and the motley rout of Satyrs, Seileni, and Maenads, who appear either
in the wine-god’s company or by themselves. Dionysos is generally
accompanied by one or more Maenads or Seileni, whether engaged in some
definite action, such as pouring wine or playing flutes, or no; but he
is also not infrequently seen as a single figure.[621] On the earlier
vases he is elderly and bearded, but on the later youthful and
beardless. He is occasionally represented with horns,[622] or in the
form of a man-headed bull.[623] He is depicted sacrificing at an
altar,[624] pouring a libation,[625] or slaying a fawn[626] or goat
??µa???f????[627]; banqueting,[628] or playing on the lyre.[629] He
rides on a bull,[630] goat,[631] mule,[632] or panther,[633] or in a
winged chariot[634]—in one case drawn by Gryphons, in another by a
Gryphon, bull, and panther[635]—or in a chariot shaped like a
ship[636]; or is carried by a Seilenos.[637] On a beautiful cup by
Exekias[638] he sails over the ocean in a boat, the mast of which grows
into a vine. We are reminded in this scene of the Homeric hymn (xix.)
and the story of the Tyrrhenian pirates, a subject which, according to
one interpretation, is represented on a vase at Athens.[639]

His birth is not often represented, and chiefly on R.F. vases[640]; it
has been referred to already in detail, in reference to Zeus. When
handed over to Hermes,[641] the newly born infant is conveyed by that
god to Nysa, where he is finally delivered to a Seilenos, to be nursed
by the Nymphs of that place.[642] Or he is handed directly to a Nymph
by Zeus,[643] or, by a curious error or confusion on the artist’s part,
to Ariadne, his future bride.[644] There is a possible representation
of the Indian Dionysos or Bassareus,[645] India being the land whence
he was fabled to come; and other vases represent various events
connected with his first manifestation of himself in Greece: such as
the madness he brought on Lykourgos, who refused to receive him,[646]
and his subsequent sacrifice after his triumph[647]; the death of the
similarly contumelious Pentheus (the story on which the plot of the
_Bacchae_ turns)[648]; or his supposed visit to the Athenian
Ikarios.[649] He sometimes appears with his mother Semele, whom he
brings back from Hades[650]; in one or two instances their heads are
seen rising from the ground to indicate their return from the nether
world.[651] They are then solemnly introduced into Olympos.[652]

Dionysos is frequently grouped with various deities, such as Apollo,
Athena, and Hermes[653]; or they are seen in his company at a
banquet.[654] He sometimes appears at the birth of Athena,[655] the
apotheosis of Herakles,[656] and his marriage with Hebe[657]; or in
heroic scenes, such as the Judgment of Paris,[658] or the combat of
Herakles and Kyknos.[659] He appears with the Seileni who attack Hera
and Iris,[660] and brings back Hephaistos to Olympos.[661] He
frequently takes part in the Gigantomachia, usually in single
combat,[662] being aided by his panther, and sometimes by Seileni and
Maenads.[663] Sometimes he is seen preparing for this event, wearing a
cuirass, while Satyrs or Maenads hold the rest of his armour.[664] He
is also grouped with Gaia ?????t??f??,[665] and with Poseidon and
Nike[666]; or accompanies the chariot of Athena[667]; and is seen in
more than one assembly of the Olympian deities.[668]

His wooing and consoling of the deserted Ariadne[669] is an attractive
and popular subject, and several vases seem to represent the nuptial
ceremonies between the pair,[670] or the preparations for the same,
with Eros assisting at the bride’s toilet.[671] Numerous are the
instances in which he is seen grouped with Ariadne, often in loving
embrace,[672] and generally surrounded by his cortège,[673] but also
alone. Or, again, he and Ariadne drive in a chariot drawn by
lions,[674] panthers,[675] stags,[676] or goats[677]; in two cases
Ariadne drives her own chariot alone,[678] in another Dionysos is seen
alone in a four-horse chariot.[679] They are also seen reclining
together at a banquet,[680] sometimes accompanied by Herakles and other
deities.[681] On a vase of quasi-Etruscan style[682] we see the
sleeping Ariadne surrounded by Dionysos, Satyrs, and Maenads. This
presumably refers to the scene in Naxos.

The numerous vases on which Dionysos appears, with or without
Ariadne, accompanied by a throng of Satyrs and Maenads, sometimes
in high revelry, sometimes in more peaceful circumstances, may next
be mentioned, though it is not necessary to cite more than a few
typical examples[683]; equally numerous are smaller groups, where
only one or two followers appear, but only a few of these need be
particularised.[684] Thus we see him in peaceful converse with
Maenads or Nymphs[685]; seizing them with amorous intent[686];
listening to a Satyr playing the lyre or flute[687]; or going to a
banquet, accompanied by Satyrs with torches[688]; or feeding a
bird.[689] In banquet scenes he receives drink from a Satyr,[690]
or plays at the kottabos (see p. 182)[691]; or Seileni steal his
food and drink.[692] He watches a Lydian woman dancing in
armour,[693] or dances himself to the flutes played by an
actor.[694] In one instance he is seen leaving his chariot to join
in the revels of his followers[695]; in another he takes part in
the orgies of the Scythian Agathyrsi,[696] and he is seen in a
drunken condition, supported by one of his followers.[697] He is
not infrequently grouped with Eros, from whom he receives drink or
a wreath[698]; also with Pan,[699] or with semi-personified figures
such as Komos (Revelry)[700] or Oinopion (Wine-drinker).[701]

=Pan= only makes his appearance on late vases, usually in Dionysiac
groups,[702] or as a single figure on the smaller Apulian wares; when
he is depicted with goat’s legs and squat proportions, he is usually
called Aegipan[703]; or, again, Paniskos, when he has the form of a
beardless youth.[704] He surprises a Nymph asleep,[705] and is
sometimes associated with the Nymph Echo.[706]

[Illustration: FIG. 120. DIONYSOS WITH SATYRS AND MAENADS (HYDRIA BY
PAMPHAIOS IN BRIT. MUS.).]

Dionysos’ connection with the Attic drama is more specially indicated
by scenes in which he appears as the inventor or patron of tragedy,
presenting a tragic mask to a young actor[707]; he also appears in an
elaborate scene representing the preparations for a Satyric drama.[708]
As the object of worship he is sometimes seen in a form which implies a
reference to some primitive cult, as an aniconic pillar-image (??a???
or ßa?t????)[709]; or, again, in the form of a tree (Dionysos
Dendrites), and homage is paid to him by Maenads.[710] Besides
sacrifices to his image, we see sacrificial dances performed,[711] or
choragic tripods consecrated to him.[712] His statue is once seen at a
fountain.[713]

                  *       *       *       *       *

We must now treat of the scenes in which Seileni and Satyrs, Maenads
and Nymphs, appear independently of Dionysos, or in particular actions
without relation to him. They are, indeed, often, if not invariably,
present in all scenes in which he takes part, whether mythological or
of a less definite character; as, for instance, the return of
Hephaistos to Olympos,[714] in which the gods are usually accompanied
by a more or less riotous escort of Satyrs, and others as already
mentioned. The attack of the Satyrs on Iris and Hera has been alluded
to in connection with the latter[715]; and they seldom elsewhere appear
in relation to the Olympian deities or other myths, except in those
scenes which depict the rising of Persephone or Ge-Pandora from the
earth.[716] But Satyrs and Maenads are sometimes represented as
performing sacrifices, not only to Dionysos,[717] but also to
Herakles,[718] or to a terminal figure of Hermes.[719] We turn next to
scenes of more general character.

There are numerous vases, especially of the R.F. period, on which
groups of Satyrs and Maenads are represented in revels of a more or
less wild and unrestrained character, or else in more peaceful
association. Those in which Dionysos himself is present have already
been enumerated, but the general types may be now considered. It may,
perhaps, be possible to distinguish two, or even three, classes of this
subject: the inactive groups of Satyrs and Maenads[720]; those in which
they rush along in frenzy and unrestrained licence, brandishing their
thyrsi, or with tambourines (_tympana_) and other musical
instruments[721]; and, lastly, scenes of convivial revelry (??µ??), in
which they are engaged in drinking from all sorts of vessels.[722]
Sometimes these revels are strictly confined to Satyrs, and then they
become absolutely licentious in character[723]; or, again, a group of
Maenads unattended tear along with torches, thyrsi, and musical
instruments[724]; or, lastly, both join in dances hand-in-hand, a
subject which on early vases is often adopted for a long frieze
encircling a vase.[725]

As a pendant to these, many subjects and single figures must here be
mentioned which seem to be excerpts from the larger compositions, as
well as independent motives presenting special features found in the
more elaborate scenes. We begin with subjects in which both Satyrs and
Maenads take part, among which we find a favourite subject to be the
gathering of fruit,[726] especially grapes, and the processes of the
vintage.[727] Satyrs offer drink to Maenads,[728] or play the flutes
for them to dance to[729]; and there is a favourite series of subjects
of an amorous character, in which the Satyrs pursue the objects of
their passion,[730] or surprise them asleep,[731] seize them and
overcome their struggles to escape,[732] and finally enfold them in
embraces,[733] or carry them on their shoulders.[734] Satyrs are also
seen surprising women while bathing[735]; and a group of them appear
astonished at the sunrise.[736]

                  *       *       *       *       *

We may next dismiss briefly the scenes which depict =Maenads= alone,
usually as single figures. They sometimes appear in a state of frenzy
(Fig. 121),[737] dancing with snakes twisted round their arms,[738] or
playing castanets,[739] or tearing a kid to pieces (??µa???f????).[740]
In quieter fashion they ride on a mule[741] or bull,[742] or are seen
accompanied by hinds, goats, and panthers,[743] or playing with a cat
and bird.[744]

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:

  From _Baumeister_.

  FIG. 121. MAENAD IN FRENZY (CUP AT MUNICH).
]

=Satyrs= in independent scenes often appear in burlesque guise, attired
and acting as athletes,[745] or as warriors,[746] with the Amazonian
_pelta_,[747] or even enacting the part of Herakles in the Garden of
the Hesperides[748]; and are present in other scenes of a burlesque
nature, which may often be derived from the Satyric drama, such as one
in which they carry ghosts (e?d??a) with torches.[749] There is also a
long list of scenes of miscellaneous character: a Seilenos
washing,[750] or piling up bedding(?)[751]; fishing[752]; as potter,
poking a furnace[753]; acting as footman to a girl and carrying a
parasol[754]; flogging a youth,[755] or holding a boy Satyr on his
hand[756]; caressing a hare[757]; and so on. Satyrs fight with
torches[758]; sport with deer and other animals[759]; ride on goats,
asses, and mules,[760] or lead them along[761]; and in one instance a
Satyr has fallen off his mule, and a companion runs to help him[762];
in another, two Satyrs draw a third in a cart.[763] They are seen
carrying chairs[764] and vessels of various kinds, such as amphorae,
situlae, kraters, rhyta,[765] or wine-skins[766]; also seated on
wine-skins or wine-jars,[767] playing games with jugs and
wine-jars,[768] balancing drinking-cups on their backs,[769] pouring
wine into a jar[770] or drawing it out from the mixing-bowl,[771] or
playing games, such as see-saw or ball.[772] Many of these scenes are
from the interiors of R.F. cups, to which they were well adapted, the
varied attitudes giving so much scope for the ingenuity of the daring
artists of the period. Scenes in which Satyrs play the lyre or flute
are, very numerous.[773]

A feature of the numerous Dionysiac subjects on vases is the tendency
to individualise Satyrs and Maenads by means of names, sometimes
meaningless, sometimes names otherwise known in mythology, and
frequently personifications of abstract conceptions, such as we shall
see later to be very common on vases of all periods; in these cases
they usually have some relation to the character or occupation of the
personages to whom they are attached. The Satyrs Marsyas and Olympos
sometimes appear in the larger compositions[774]; the former has been
already mentioned in another connection. There is also a curious
representation of Akratos,[775] the deity of unmixed wine (a liquid
which to the Greeks implied an extravagance of revelry, owing to the
intoxicating nature of the undiluted beverage). A type of Seilenos
covered from head to foot with shaggy skin, and known as Papposeilenos,
is often found on the later vases.[776] It is difficult to distinguish
in all cases between Seileni and Satyrs on the vases, and the exact
differences between the various types have not yet been properly
elucidated, so that the terms are of necessity somewhat
conventional.[777] The equine type of Satyr, with horse’s hoofs as well
as tail, which is so frequently found on the sixth-century Ionic vases,
has been noted elsewhere.[778] The young beardless Satyr is mostly
found in the later period.

The number of vases on which Satyrs and Maenads are distinguished by
name is very large, but only a few of the more important need be
mentioned, along with some of the more curious names from the isolated
instances.[779] On a vase in Berlin[780] no less than ten Maenads are
named—Anthe (Flower), Choro (Dance), Chrysis (Gold), Kale (Beauty),
Kisso (Ivy), Makaria (Blessed), Naia, Nymphe, Phanope, and Periklymene
(Renowned); on one at Leyden[781] six—Dorkis, Io, Klyto, Molpe (Song),
Myro, and Xantho (Fair-hair). On the former vase a Seilenos is
expressly so named, and on the latter are four Satyrs with names; on a
kylix by Brygos in the British Museum[782] the Seileni attacking Iris
are styled Babacchos, Dromis, Echon, Terpon, etc.[783]

Other Satyr-names are Briacchos,[784] Dithyrambos,[785] Demon,[786]
Hedyoinos (Sweet Wine),[787] Hybris (Insolence),[788] Hedymeles (Sweet
Song),[789] Komos (Revelry),[790] Kissos (Ivy),[791] Molkos,[792]
Oinos,[793] Oreimachos,[794] Simos (Snub-nose),[795] Tyrbas (Rout).[796]

The Maenads’ names are if anything more numerous: Bacche,[797] Choiros
(Pig!),[798] Doro,[799] Eudia (Calm),[800] Eudaimonia (Happiness),[801]
Euthymia (Good Cheer),[802] Erophyllis,[803] Galene (Calm),[804] Hebe
(Youth),[805] Komodia (Comedy) and Tragoedia (Tragedy),[806] Kalyke
(Bud),[807] Lilaia,[808] Mainas,[809] Nymphaia,[810] Opora (Harvest)
and Oreias (Mountain-Nymph),[811] Oinanthe,[812] Pannychis (All-night
Revel),[813] Polyerate (Well-beloved),[814] Philomela,[815] Sime
(Snub-nose),[816] Terpsikome,[817] Thaleia,[818] Rodo (Rose),[819]
Paidia,[820] and Kraipale,[821] a name which is not easy to render in
classical English, but which denotes the results following on a night’s
debauch.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                               PLATE LII

[Illustration:

  From _Furtwaengler and Reichhold_.

  THE UNDER-WORLD, FROM AN APULIAN VASE AT MUNICH.
]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                         § 2. THE NETHER WORLD

The Chthonian character of Dionysos brings us by a natural transition
to the =deities of the under-world=, and in connection therewith it
will be convenient to treat of Death-deities of all kinds, as well as
scenes representing the life of the nether regions.

Of Demeter and Persephone, the Chthonian goddesses _par excellence_, we
have already spoken (p. 27), and of the myths connected with them, such
as the rape of the latter by =Hades= or Pluto, the king of the realms
named after him. It is owing to this connection with Persephone that
Hades is found in such scenes as the sending forth of Triptolemos,[822]
or at her return to the upper world,[823] as well as at the rape of his
consort. He is frequently seen in company with her, as the rulers of
the nether world,[824] especially on the large Italian “under-world
vases” referred to below, and sometimes they are represented banqueting
together.[825] As king of the nether world he is appropriately grouped
with his brothers Zeus and Poseidon, the rulers of the air and
ocean.[826] He is occasionally carried by Herakles on his
shoulders,[827] but the meaning of this subject is uncertain. He also
appears as a single figure, with sceptre and cornucopia.[828]

The only general representations of the under-world are to be found on
the large Apulian vases made for sepulchral purposes (Vol. I. p. 476),
of which some half-dozen are conspicuous for the number of subjects and
figures they contain. All these are collected together in the _Wiener
Vorlegeblätter_, Series E., the list being as follows:—

  (1) Munich 849      = _Wiener Vorl._ E. pl. 1      = Reinach, i. 258
  (2) Naples 3222     =         ”         pl. 2      =    ”     i. 167
  (3) Karlsruhe 388   =         ”         pl. 3, 1   =    ”     i. 108
  (4) Naples S.A. 709 =         ”         pl. 3, 2   =    ”     i. 455
  (5) Petersburg 424  =         ”         pls. 4 and
                                          5, 1       =    ”     i. 355
  (6) Petersburg 426  =         ”         pl. 6, 2   =    ”     i. 479

No. (1) is reproduced in Plate LII. On a smaller scale, or fragmentary,
are the following:—

  (7) Petersburg 498    = _Wiener Vorl._ E. pl. 5, 2
  (8) B.M. F 270        =         ”         pl. 6, 1 = Reinach, i. 356
  (9) Karlsruhe 256     =         ”         pl. 6, 3 =    ”     i. 455
  (10) Jatta Coll. 1094 =         ”         pl. 6, 4 =    ”     i. 356
  (11) Naples S.A. 11   =         ”         pl. 6, 5 =    ”     i. 401

There are also three B.F. vases having reference to the under-world,
though in the first two cases it is probable that the scene relates to
the return of Persephone (see p. 28), the accompanying figure of
Sisyphos only being introduced to mark the locality:—

  (12) B.M. B 261 (Hades, Persephone, Hermes, Sisyphos).

(13) Munich 728 = _Wiener Vorl._ E. pl. 6, 6 = Reinach, ii. 48 (similar
    scene).

(14) Berlin 1844 (Persephone and Sisyphos only).

On the Apulian vases there is usually in the centre a pillared building
representing the palace of Hades, in which he and his spouse stand or
sit; round this are grouped various figures and episodes connected with
the nether regions: Herakles carrying off Kerberos[829]; Orpheus with
his lyre, sometimes accompanied by Eurydike[830]; persons undergoing
punishment, such as Sisyphos with his rock[831]; Tantalos threatened
with a rock, not as in the usual legend suffering from thirst[832]; the
Danaids with their hydriae[833]; and Theseus and Peirithoös sitting
with their hands bound behind them.[834] In one instance a Fury, at the
instance of Hades and Hekate, is binding one, the other having already
entered on his punishment[835]; in another we see Theseus liberated and
about to depart from his friend (see below, p. 111).[836]

Among the administrators of these penalties are Aiakos, Minos, and
Rhadamanthos, the judges of the souls[837]; the Erinnyes or
Furies[838]; and allegorical personages, such as Dike (Justice),[839]
Ananke (Necessity),[840] or Poinae (Punishments).[841] Of the Chthonian
deities, Hermes,[842] Hekate,[843] Triptolemos,[844] and Iacchos[845]
are present. Olympian deities are also sometimes introduced as
spectators.[846] Other figures introduced are Megara with the two
children of Herakles[847]; Pelops with Myrtilos and Hippodameia[848]; a
group of the Blessed Shades[849]; and (but not on this class of vase)
Oknos with his ass, a subject depicted by Polygnotos in his great
fresco at Delphi.[850] The subject of Ixion on the wheel is usually
found by itself, but occurs on the neck of one of the Apulian
vases.[851]

Another subject which may be associated with the above scenes is that
of _Charon_ and his bark; on the vases, however, its significance is
purely sepulchral, as it is confined to the Attic white lekythi (Vol.
I. p. 459), on some of which the dead man is represented entering the
ferry-boat.[852] Some vases of Etruscan fabric also represent groups of
Chthonian deities, especially Charon, who in the mythology of that
people is no longer “the grim ferryman that poets write of,” but
_Charun_, a hideous demon wielding a huge hammer.[853] In one instance
he separates Alkestis from Admetos[854]; in another he watches Ajax
stabbing a captive Trojan.[855]

[Illustration:

  From _Baumeister_.

  FIG. 122. CHARON’S BARK (LEKYTHOS AT MUNICH).
]

The _Erinnyes_ or Furies play an important part in the nether-world
scenes,[856] and one is also represented at the punishment of
Ixion.[857] They pursue Orestes after the slaughter of his mother and
Aigisthos to Delphi and Tauris,[858] and even when with Pylades he
comes to make himself known to Electra.[859] Among other mythological
scenes they are found at the combat of Herakles and Kyknos[860]; with
Pelops,[861] and with Medeia and Jason[862]; and threatening with
punishment the hero Agrios, who is seized and bound upon an altar by
Oineus and Diomedes.[863] _Kerberos_ is once seen without Herakles in
the under-world vases[864]; and there is a very curious representation
of his being chained up by Hermes.[865]

_Hekate_ as a Chthonian deity frequently appears on the under-world
vases[866]; she is also connected with Eleusinian scenes and
legends,[867] such as the sending of Triptolemos,[868] the birth of
Dionysos or Iacchos,[869] or with the rape and return of
Persephone.[870] She appears also as a single figure.[871] Allusion has
already been made to the Chthonian associations of Hermes, Triptolemos,
and Iacchos (pp. 27, 52).

[Illustration: FIG. 123. THANATOS AND HYPNOS WITH BODY OF WARRIOR (FROM
BRIT. MUS. D 58).]

_Thanatos_, the personification of Death, appears on vases[872] almost
exclusively in one aspect, as the bearer of souls in conjunction with
Hypnos (Sleep); they convey the body of Memnon from Troy to his home in
Egypt,[873] and this type is borrowed for other scenes (_e.g._ on the
funeral lekythi) in which an ordinary warrior is borne “to his long
home.”[874] In one instance Thanatos is seen urging Ajax on to commit
suicide[875]; he also appears on another vase where the subject may
relate to the story of Ixion.[876] Representations of Death-demons or
Harpies,[877] and of ???e? ?a??t???, or small winged figures boding or
signifying death,[878] are by no means uncommon. It has been held by
some writers that the personifications of Thanatos above referred to
are more properly to be regarded as ???e? ?a??t???.[879] These small
winged figures are also employed to represent a soul escaping from a
deceased person[880]; or, again, to indicate the souls of Achilles and
Hector (or Memnon) when weighed by Zeus (see below, pp. 130, 132).[881]
We also find actual representations on B.F. vases of the ghost of a
hero, especially in Trojan scenes; he floats through the air fully
armed, with large wings.[882]

                   § 3. COSMOGONIC AND OTHER DEITIES

In the next instance it will be found appropriate to discuss sundry
representations which are connected with the earlier or Titanic
cosmogony, although, with the exception of the Gigantomachia, already
discussed, allusions thereto are comparatively rare on vases.

Chief among these personages is =Ge= or =Gaia=, the Earth-mother, half
Titanic, half Chthonian, who is usually represented as a figure rising
half out of the ground, with flowing hair. She thus appears in several
Gigantomachia scenes (as the mother of the giants, who were G??e?e??,
earth-born),[883] and at the birth of Dionysos and Erichthonios, where
she hands the child to Athena.[884] As a full-length figure she appears
protecting her sons Tityos and Antaios against Apollo and Herakles
respectively[885]; also in certain doubtful scenes on B.F. vases as the
Nursing-mother (?????t??f??), with two children in her arms,[886]
though we have already seen (p. 30) that these are susceptible of
another interpretation. Finally, the series of scenes in which men are
represented hammering on the head of a female figure rising from the
earth[887] may be regarded as referring to Gaia, with allusion to the
custom of smiting on the earth to raise spirits. In this connection
Gaia is undoubtedly to be identified with Pandora (see below).[888] A
cognate subject is that of a similar female head or bust in company
with Eros, sometimes found on late Italian vases.[889] If Gaia is here
intended, her connection with Eros finds some support in the poetic
cosmogonies[890]; otherwise it may be Aphrodite.

The story of _Kronos_, who swallowed the stone given to him by his wife
Rhea in place of his children, is possibly depicted on one vase,[891]
though the genuineness thereof is open to doubt. The stone is enveloped
in drapery to prevent discovery. A bust of Kronos has also been
identified on a vase.[892] The story of Zagreus and his destruction by
the Titans, which belongs to the same cycle, also finds one or two
representations. One vase appears to represent them devouring him
piecemeal.[893]

Another personage who may perhaps be regarded as of pre-Olympian origin
is _Themis_, who comes between Gaia and Apollo in the occupation of the
prophetic stool at Delphi (Aesch. _Eum._ 2). Aigeus, the father of
Theseus, is represented as consulting her seated on her tripod,[894]
and one vase has been supposed to depict her conversing with Zeus
before the birth of Dionysos.[895] She also appears at the Judgment of
Paris.[896]

_Kybele_, the mother of the gods, only occurs in one or two doubtful
instances, with the lion which is usually associated with her.[897]

Among the primitive and recondite Greek cults which go back to a remote
origin, that of =the Kabeiri= may perhaps be mentioned here. Previous
to the discovery, in 1887–88, of their sanctuary near Thebes, little
was known, either from literary or monumental sources, of these
mysterious deities; but the excavations on this site yielded large
quantities of pottery with scenes relating to their cult, mostly of a
burlesque character.[898] Among these was one very interesting fragment
representing (with names inscribed) the Kabeiros and his son (Pais)
banqueting, and attended by two deities known as Mitos and
Pratoleia.[899] Lenormant noticed that the spectator-deities on an
under-world vase in the British Museum correspond exactly to the four
Cabeiric deities as described by certain ancient authorities.[900]

Turning next to myths which treat of the semi-divine personages of the
earliest cosmogony, we have the legends given by Hesiod of Prometheus
and the creation of =Pandora=; and we may include with them the Titan
Atlas. Pandora, it has been already noted, is only a variation of
Gaia,[901] and this is borne out by the name given to her on a
beautiful polychrome cup in the British Museum representing her
creation, completed by Hephaistos and Athena.[902] She is there named
??es?d??a, “She who sends up gifts,” _E.g._ from the earth. The subject
is not so popular as might have been expected, but appears on two other
vases in the Museum, in each case with Olympian deities as spectators
of the event, and on a beautiful vase now at Oxford.[903] The story of
the opening of the p???? has not found its way into art, but its
connection with the Athenian feast of the p??????a is curiously
illustrated in one instance.[904]

=Prometheus= too is seldom seen, and chiefly on B.F. vases. In one case
he receives a libation from Hera,[905] and there are two or three
representations of his liberation by Herakles.[906] On a Cyrenaic cup
he is grouped with Atlas, the vulture pecking at his breast, while the
other groans under the burthen of the heavens.[907] =Atlas= is found
almost exclusively with Herakles in connection with his visit to the
Garden of the Hesperides. Either he is actually present in the
Garden[908] or is confronted with the hero, who in some cases bears his
burden for him while he obtains the apples.[909] He is also seen in
company with a Sphinx.[910]

                  *       *       *       *       *

We now come to discuss a few subordinate deities or semi-divine
personages who do not fall into any of the preceding categories.

=Asklepios=, chiefly a figure of later art, is exceedingly rare on
vases. There is, in fact, only one on which he can certainly be
identified. This is a late R.F. vase at Athens, on which he is seen
reclining on a couch feeding a serpent and accompanied by Hygieia.[911]
Nor does the latter occur elsewhere, though her name, as already noted
(p. 43), is sometimes given to one of the personified figures attending
on Aphrodite.[912] =Eileithyia=, the goddess of childbirth, generally
appears, in duplicated form, assisting Zeus at the birth of
Athena,[913] or Leto at that of Apollo and Artemis.[914] She is closely
related to Artemis, and a representation of a goddess who has been
identified as Artemis-Eileithyia may be seen on an early Boeotian vase
with reliefs at Athens.[915]

=Iris=, the messenger of the gods, is usually distinguished from Nike
by her caduceus or herald’s staff, and from Hebe by her wings. She is
often depicted as a single figure,[916] or pouring a libation to Hera,
Athena, or other deities.[917] She is associated more especially with
Hera, as Hermes is with Zeus, and attends on the former in several
scenes of assemblages of the gods.[918] In company with Hera she is
attacked by a troop of Seileni and defended by Herakles,[919] and on
another vase she is similarly surprised by a troop of Centaurs.[920]
She assists at the creation of Pandora,[921] at the Judgment of
Paris,[922] and at the wedding of Peleus and Thetis,[923] and also
appears in the Garden of the Hesperides.[924] She is also seen with
Paris carrying off Helen[925]; and with Menelaos fetching her
back[926]; and in another scene, apparently drawn from a Homeric source
(_Il._ viii. 397 ff.), where she dissuades Athena and Hera from taking
sides in the war, at the behest of Zeus.[927] She conveys the infant
Herakles to the Centaur Cheiron,[928] and is also seen in company with
a warrior.[929]

=Hebe= in Olympos performs somewhat similar functions to Iris, more
particularly that of pouring out wine for the gods.[930] She is also
specially associated with Herakles at and after his apotheosis,[931]
appearing as his bride in several instances.[932] Besides these, she
frequently appears in assemblies of the gods,[933] or at the punishment
of Marsyas,[934] or the Judgment of Paris.[935]

                         § 4. PERSONIFICATIONS

The next group of deities with which we have to deal is that of the
various personifications which are to be found in great numbers on
vases of all periods, especially the later. These naturally fall under
several headings, which, following the lines of the classification
adopted by M. Pottier in a valuable article on the subject,[936] we may
distribute as follows:—

          1. Physical (Sun, Moon, Dawn, Winds, etc.). 2. Geographical
          (Cities, Rivers, Mountains, etc.). 3. Products of earth
          (Wine, Harvest, etc.). 4. Groups of various kinds (Muses,
          Nymphs, etc.). 5. Physical conditions (Health, Old Age,
          etc.). 6. Social advantages (Wealth, Peace, Victory, etc.).
          7. Ethical ideas (Justice, Envy, Strife, etc.). 8.
          Metaphysical ideas (Necessity, Law, etc.). 9. Social
          enjoyments (Comedy, Tragedy, Revelry, etc.). 10. Descriptive
          names.

Of some of these, indeed, we have already treated—such as the beings
included in the following of Aphrodite and Dionysos, Ge-Pandora, Hebe
(Youth), and the deities of the nether world. The rest we now proceed
to consider in order, beginning with natural phenomena, and firstly
those of an astronomical character.

I. =Helios=, the Sun, who in some senses, especially in the mythology
of the Roman poets, is identical with Phoebus Apollo, is only once so
identified on vases.[937] He is usually depicted in his four-horse
chariot rising out of the sea (as on the eastern pediment of the
Parthenon), either as a single figure or in connection with some myth,
indicating that the action takes place at sunrise. As a single figure
he appears both on early and late vases, on the latter, usually, as an
upper decoration on the large Apulian kraters.[938] He is also
accompanied by Eos (Dawn) and Selene (Moon), by Hemera (Day), or by
Eros[939]; but in most cases he and Selene appear together, the latter
descending as he rises (as on the Parthenon pediment). Thus on R.F.
vases they denote the time of the action, as when Theseus descends
below the sea to visit Poseidon,[940] or as on the Blacas krater in the
British Museum, when Eos pursues Kephalos.[941] On the latter vase four
stars are also depicted diving into the sea, to indicate their setting.
On Apulian vases he is present at the seizure of Persephone,[942] at
the flight of Pelops from Oinomaos,[943] at the madness of
Lykourgos,[944] at the Judgment of Paris,[945] and in the Garden of the
Hesperides.[946] In one instance a group of Satyrs start back
affrighted at his appearance.[947] There are two instances of his
encounter with Herakles, who endeavoured to stay his progress with his
bow.[948]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                              PLATE LIII

[Illustration: HELIOS AND STARS, FROM THE BLACAS KRATER IN THE BRITISH
MUSEUM.]

         ------------------------------------------------------

=Selene=, the Moon, appears in many of the scenes already described
under Helios, as on the Blacas krater. She is depicted under two types,
either on horseback[949] or driving a chariot like Helios,[950] both as
a single figure and in other scenes; and she is sometimes characterised
by the lunar disc or crescent. Besides the scenes already referred to,
she appears on horseback at the birth of Dionysos[951] and at the
pursuit of Medeia by Jason.[952] The magic arts used by Thessalian
witches to draw down the moon from heaven are also the subject of a
vase-painting,[953] where two women essay to perform this feat by means
of a rope, addressing her, “O Lady Moon!”

=Stars= are occasionally represented with an astronomical reference, as
on the Blacas krater, where they appear in the form of youths, or
grouped with Helios, Selene, and Eos.[954] Phosphoros, the Morning
Star, may be identified in this connection, represented as a youth
running[955]; but in other cases they are not personified, as on a vase
which represents the moon and stars with the constellation Pegasos.[956]

=Hemera=, the Day, we have already once noted; but in art she is hardly
to be distinguished from Eos (Dawn). Nor can Nyx (Night) be identified
with certainty on vases.[957] =Eos= is not an uncommon figure,
especially on R.F. vases, and she also plays a part in certain myths.
As a single figure she appears rising from the sea in, or driving, a
four-horse chariot like Helios,[958] her steeds in one case being named
Phlegethon and Lampon. She is also represented flying with two hydriae,
from which she pours out dew upon the earth.[959] She is frequently
seen pursuing or carrying Kephalos[960] or Tithonos,[961] and is
present at the apotheosis of Alkmena.[962] At the combat of her son
Memnon with Achilles she and the other mother, Thetis, are generally
present.[963] She also pleads with Zeus for her son’s safety,[964] and
bears away his body after the fatal issue of the fight.[965]

Next we have to deal with =the Winds=, as personified by the figures of
Boreas, Zephyros, etc. As single figures they seldom appear, though we
have possible instances of _Boreas_, with the unusual type of a
serpent’s tail,[966] or simply as a winged male figure.[967] A wind-god
is seen in an episode from the Gigantomachia opposing the chariot of
Zeus,[968] and another in an assemblage of deities round Apollo
Kitharoidos.[969] _Zephyros_ is seen pursuing Hyakinthos,[970] and he
and Boreas together bear the body of a warrior to the tomb in the same
manner as Hypnos and Thanatos.[971] But the most important subject
connected with Boreas is his pursuit of the Athenian maiden Oreithyia,
a frequent scene on the later R.F. vases,[972] some being very fine
examples. Erechtheus, Kekrops, and the Nymphs Aglauros, Herse, and
Pandrosos, are usually present, and the latter in one case announce the
news to Kekrops or Erechtheus.[973] Boreas is also depicted in the act
of punishing Phineus by blinding him, and attacked by the latter’s
friend Parebios.[974]

On some early B.F. vases we find winged beings which may be styled
_Boreades_, in conjunction with Harpies, apparently representing the
influences of good and evil winds respectively.[975] Zetes and Kalais,
the sons of Boreas, will be treated of in the story of the
Argonautika.[976] The _Aurae_ or breezes have been identified on a
well-known vase in the British Museum,[977] and on an Apulian vase in
the same collection is a head undoubtedly intended for Aura.[978] The
_Hyades_ or rain-goddesses in two instances extinguish the flames of a
funeral pyre at the bidding of Zeus, at the apotheosis of Alkmena[979]
and of Herakles[980]; in one of the latter instances they are named
Arethusa and Premnusia. They also receive the infant Dionysos.[981]
_Echo_ belongs perhaps rather to the Dionysiac cycle, appearing as the
beloved of Pan.[982]

                  *       *       *       *       *

II. We may next consider the personifications of =cities and
countries=, which are, indeed, in some cases more than merely
symbolical figures, being actual goddesses with a definite cult, such
as the Nymph Kyrene, who often appears on works of art.[983] On the
great Naples vase representing Dareios in a council of war,
personifications of _Hellas_ and _Asia_ are placed among the
spectator-deities,[984] and the former seems also to be indicated on a
similar vase with a battle of Greeks and Persians.[985] On one of the
late vases with the subject of Pelops and Oinomaos, a personification
of the locality _Olympia_ appears to be similarly present,[986] just as
on the Hieron kotyle the personification of Eleusis is included among
the Eleusinian and other deities at the sending forth of
Triptolemos.[987] The city of _Thebes_ is personified in several
instances, especially as a spectator of Kadmos slaying the dragon[988];
also on a “Megarian” bowl with reliefs in the British Museum, the
subjects on which are taken from the _Phoenissae_ of Euripides.[989]
_Nemea_, the scene of Herakles’ victory over the lion, and of the death
of Archermos, is similarly personified as a Nymph in the
representations of both subjects,[990] and the town of _Krommyon_ as a
Nymph protests against the slaying of the sow by Theseus.[991] The
Nymph _Sparta_ occurs once, dismounting from her horse.[992] Two cups
of the early B.F. class usually known (from their subjects) as
Cyrenaic, bear representations of the Nymph _Kyrene_ (see above)—in one
case with Apollo, in the other holding a branch of silphium (the local
product) and surrounded by Boreads and Harpies (see above).[993]

Among the Greek islands, _Aegina_ and _Salamis_ were supposed to have
derived their names from Nymphs beloved of Zeus and Poseidon, who are
represented pursuing these quasi-personified figures[994]; we may also
regard Europa as coming under that category.[995] Zeus also pursues
_Taygeta_, who is connected with the mountain in Laconia.[996] On one
vase we find the names of the islands _Delos_, _Euboea_, and
_Lemnos_,[997] given, presumably in pure fancy, to two Maenads and a
Satyr in a Dionysiac scene where all the figures are named. A more
genuine instance is that of the Nymph _Krete_ on the Talos vase,
indicating the locality.[998]

Turning to other geographical features, we have Mount _Olympos_
transformed into a lyre-playing companion of Satyrs[999]; or, again,
river-gods such as _Acheloös_, who as a combination of man and bull, or
with a fish-body like Triton, wrestles with Herakles.[1000] The river
_Nile_ appears once, but not personified—only as an indication of
landscape.[1001] In connection with the city of Thebes we find
personifications of the local river _Ismenos_ and the local
fountain-Nymphs _Dirke_ and _Krenaia_.[1002]

                  *       *       *       *       *

III. Natural products, such as Oinos (Wine) and Opora (Harvest), are
only found personified among the Dionysiac conceptions with which we
have already dealt (p. 65); to these two names we may add those of
Hedyoinos (Sweet Wine), Kissos (Ivy), Kalyke (Bud), and Rodo (Rose),
the three latter coming more under the heading of pet-names than of
strict personifications.

                  *       *       *       *       *

IV. Our next class includes certain groups of personages (all feminine)
which for the most part hold their own throughout all periods of art
and literature, and are, so to speak, more crystallised into definite
mythological personages, associated with the gods and human beings of
the legendary ages. These are the Muses, the Charites or Graces, the
Horae or Seasons, the Moirae or Fates, and the Erinnyes or Furies.

=The Muses= do not appear so frequently in vase-paintings as in
sculpture, and mostly on later vases. Two fine R.F. examples of the
whole nine (with their appropriate attributes) call for mention[1003];
other vases give a more limited number, or even single figures[1004];
but it must be remembered that in such cases identification is
difficult, as characterisation by means of a lyre or scenic mask does
not necessarily connote the presence of a Muse. On one vase Terpsichore
is seen with two figures inscribed as Mousaios and Melousa[1005]; but
these may be no more than fancy names for an ordinary group of
musicians. Five of them are seen in a group with Apollo, Thamyris, and
Sappho,[1006] and elsewhere they accompany Apollo.[1007]

The _Graces_ can nowhere be identified on Greek vases, though they form
a well-known type in sculpture; but there is an Etruscan kylix in the
British Museum (probably copied from a Greek original), which appears
to represent them as an interior group.[1008] The _Horae_ or Seasons
appear (without distinctive names) on the François vase at the nuptials
of Peleus and Thetis, and on the Sosias cup[1009] in an Olympian
assemblage (three in each case); also two of them at the sending forth
of Triptolemos.[1010] The three _Moirae_ (Fates) appear on the François
vase (as above), and once also at the birth of Athena[1011]; the Furies
have already been discussed.[1012]

                  *       *       *       *       *

V. The personifications having reference to physical conditions (as
distinguished from ethical ideas) are comparatively few in number. They
include _Hebe_ (Youth), who by virtue of her divine attributes has
already been discussed in another section (p. 77); _Hygieia_ (Health),
who is also a fully developed goddess, but only once occurs on a vase,
except among the somewhat vague personifications surrounding Aphrodite
(see pp. 43, 76]); and three others, regarded as of masculine sex.
These are Geras (Old Age), Hypnos (Sleep), and Thanatos (Death).
_Geras_ is seen in combat with Herakles[1013]; Thanatos has already
been discussed (p. 71). _Hypnos_ as a winged youth hovers over
Alkyoneus, whom Herakles overcame while asleep[1014]; causes Ariadne to
sleep while Theseus escapes[1015]; and with Thanatos carries the body
of Memnon,[1016] or an ordinary mortal,[1017] to the tomb.

                  *       *       *       *       *

VI. Social advantages as apart from ethical qualities are perhaps
difficult to determine exactly; but we may fairly rank under this
heading such ideas as are suggested by Chrysos (Gold) and Ploutos
(Wealth); Eirene (Peace); Nike (Victory); and the numerous attendants
of Aphrodite and Dionysos, such as Eunomia, Eudaimonia, and others
already named (pp. 43, 65). _Chrysos_ and _Ploutos_ as boys accompany
Nike in her chariot[1018]; _Eirene’s_ appearance on vases is doubtful,
but she may appear in one instance carrying the infant Ploutos.[1019]
The birth of Ploutos seems to be represented in one instance.[1020]

But by far the most important personage in this class is =Nike
(Victory)=, whose appearance as a winged female figure is so often
attested by inscriptions on R.F. vases that she can generally be
identified with certainty. She is especially popular as a single figure
on the Nolan amphorae and lekythi of the “severe” and “strong” periods,
some of which are conspicuously beautiful examples.[1021] Altogether
her appearances rival those of Eros in number, though on the Italian
vases they are far fewer. Whether Nike ever occurs on B.F. vases is a
very doubtful point, and has been denied by many scholars, but some
figures are not easy to explain in any other way.[1022] On other works
of art she does not appear before 480 B.C., unless the “Nike” of
Archermos is to be so identified; it seems probable that she was an
offshoot from Athena, whom we know to have been worshipped under the
name of Nike, as in her temple on the Athenian Acropolis.

She is frequently associated with the gods, either in scenes from
mythology or in groups apart from action[1023]; usually she pours
libations to them, or crowns them in reference to some achievement.
Thus we find her with Zeus,[1024] with Hera,[1025] with Athena,[1026]
with Poseidon and Dionysos,[1027] with Apollo (especially at his
victory over Marsyas),[1028] with Artemis Elaphebolos,[1029] and with
Aphrodite.[1030] She frequently crowns or pours libations to Herakles,
or attends him at his apotheosis[1031]; on the later vases she takes
Athena’s place in conveying him in a chariot to Olympos.[1032]

Among the numerous mythological events in which Nike plays a more or
less symbolical part may be mentioned the Gigantomachia, in which she
drives Zeus’ chariot,[1033] the birth of Athena,[1034] the sending of
Triptolemos,[1035] the Judgment of Paris,[1036] the birth of
Dionysos[1037] and that of Erichthonios,[1038] and the punishment of
Ixion.[1039] Among Trojan scenes she appears with Achilles
arming,[1040] at his (supposed) fight with Telephos and possibly also
at that with Memnon,[1041] and at the carrying off of the
Palladion.[1042] She is also seen with Herakles in the Garden of the
Hesperides,[1043] with the Dioskuri,[1044] with Perseus and
Bellerophon,[1045] with Orestes at Delphi[1046]; crowning Hellas as the
victor over the Persians[1047]; and in many scenes with Dionysos.[1048]

More numerous and characteristic, however, are the scenes in which she
appears as a single figure, or associated with mortals, usually
victorious warriors or athletes. As a single figure she most commonly
pours a libation over an altar,[1049] or flies towards the altar
bearing a torch, incense-burner, lyre, tripod, sash, or other
attribute[1050]; in one case (unless Iris is intended) a jug and
caduceus.[1051] Especially characterised as the goddess of Victory, she
often holds a palm-branch.[1052] She frequently takes part in religious
and sacrificial ceremonies, such as the decoration or dedication of a
choragic tripod,[1053] or burns incense,[1054] or herself sacrifices a
ram or bull.[1055] The last-named subject is, however, commoner on gems
and a certain class of terracotta reliefs.[1056] On one vase she gives
drink to a bull[1057]; or, again, she rides on a sacrificial
bull[1058]; or places a hydria on a fountain or altar.[1059] She
pursues a hare, doe, or bird,[1060] or offers a bird to a youth.[1061]
On the later Panathenaic amphorae and elsewhere she holds the
????st????? or stern-ornament of a ship[1062]; and sometimes she erects
a trophy.[1063]

[Illustration: FIG. 124. NIKE SACRIFICING BULL (BRITISH MUSEUM F 66).]

She appears in a chariot drawn by female Centaurs,[1064] or accompanied
by Chrysos and Ploutos (see above),[1065] and she also conducts a
victorious warrior in this manner.[1066] In other instances she pours a
libation to a warrior,[1067] who is sometimes inscribed with a fanciful
name[1068]; or, again, as anticipating his victory, she brings him his
helmet.[1069] She is, however, more frequently seen in athletic scenes,
crowning a victorious athlete,[1070] rider,[1071] or charioteer,[1072]
or superintending the games in the palaestra,[1073] torch-races,[1074]
or the taking of an oath by an athlete.[1075] In musical contests she
performs the same functions, crowning or pouring libations to a
successful performer.[1076] She crowns a successful potter in his
workshop,[1077] and also a poet (?).[1078] A being of similar
character, who may perhaps be recognised in the figure of a winged
youth on some B.F. and early R.F. vases, is Agon, the personification
of athletic contests.[1079]

On the later R.F. vases the figure of Nike is often duplicated,
probably more to produce a balanced composition than for any other
reason.[1080]

                  *       *       *       *       *

VII. The next class of personifications is that of abstract ethical
ideas. Even on the earlier vases there are found a considerable number
of these, such as Eris (Strife); but on the later, unlimited play is
given to the tendency of the age (seen also in sculpture and painting)
to invest every abstract idea with a personality, apart from any idea
of deification or mythological import.

Among these, by far the most numerous examples are, of course, those
relating to the passion of Love. We have already traced the development
of the type and conception of Eros in vase-paintings, and in the same
place we have had occasion to speak of the associated ideas which
became personified as subsidiary conceptions to that of Love, such as
Peitho (Persuasion), Pothos (Yearning), and Himeros (Charm), Phthonos
(Envy or _Amor invidiosus_), and Talas (Unfortunate or Unrequited
Love).[1081] Of a similar type are the feminine conceptions associated
with Aphrodite-Eudaimonia (Happiness), Euthymia (Cheerfulness), and the
like.[1082]

Among other abstract ideas are those of _Arete_ (Virtue) and _Hedone_
(Pleasure), which have been suggested as represented on one vase.[1083]
On a R.F. vase in Vienna, _Dike_ (Justice) is seen overcoming _Adikia_
(Injustice)[1084]; _Apate_ (Deceit) on the vase with Dareios in council
beguiles the goddess Asia with bad advice,[1085] and also leads Tereus
astray[1086]; _Phobos_ (Fear) drives the chariot of Ares when he
assists Kyknos against Herakles[1087]; he is specially associated with
the god of war, the idea being that of inducing panic among enemies;
and in many cases his head appears, like that of the Gorgon, as a
device on shields.[1088] In one instance he appears as a lion-headed
monster.[1089] Artemis, in the capacity of _Aidos_ (Shame), hinders
Tityos from carrying off Leto.[1090] _Eris_ (Strife) appears on B.F.
vases as a winged female figure running, in scenes of combat,
chariot-races, etc., or as a single figure.[1091] But the
identification is not always certain; in some combat scenes it is
possible that Ate or a Ker is meant, and in those of an agonistic
character we may see Agon, the personification of athletics (see above,
p. 89).[1092]

                  *       *       *       *       *

VIII. The metaphysical ideas next to be discussed are almost
exclusively punitive agencies, either connected with scenes in the
under-world (Ananke, Poinae, and the Furies), or bringing down
penalties and disasters on the heads of wrong-doers, such as the
personifications of madness which occur in many of the tragic subjects
on Apulian vases.

In the first group we reckon _Ananke_ (Necessity) and the _Poinae_
(Punishments), who appear with the Furies in a scene from the
under-world,[1093] _Ate_ or _Ker_ (Destiny), a winged figure seen at
the death of Hector[1094] and at the madness of Lykourgos[1095]; and
_Nemesis_ (Vengeance) in the scene between Atreus and Thyestes,[1096]
with reference to its fate-fraught character. In less tragic
circumstances the latter is present in a bridal scene, with attributes
of a flower and an apple.[1097] The Moirae or Fates have already been
mentioned (p. 83), as has Themis or Divine Ordinance (p. 74).

The second group includes _Lyssa_ (Frenzy), who drives Aktaeon,
Hippolytos, and Lykourgos to madness or destruction[1098]; _Mania_
(Madness), who similarly drives Herakles to slay his children[1099];
and _Oistros_ (_E.g._ a Gad-fly), who performs similar functions when
Medeia is about to slay hers.[1100]

                  *       *       *       *       *

IX. Personifications relating to social enjoyments, such as games, the
drama, or banquets, are closely analogous to many of those described
under headings III. and VI., and occur in the same connection. Thus in
Dionysiac scenes we find Choro (Dance), Molpe (Song), Dithyrambos,
Hedymeles (Sweet Song), Komos (Revelry), Komodia and Tragoedia (Comedy
and Tragedy), and Pannychis and Kraipale, typifying all-night revels
and their consequences.[1101]

                  *       *       *       *       *

X. Finally, there are what M. Pottier has described as personifications
of individualities, under which heading fall many conceptions which do
not find a place in any of the classes already discussed. Among these
are many of the names given to Maenads and Satyrs (p. 65), which are
intermediate between personal names and embodiments of abstract or
physical ideas, some inclining more to one side, some to the other. Of
these it is only necessary to mention as illustrative of the present
subject the Mainas[1102] and the Nymphe[1103] found as names of
individuals on several vases, and the Oinopion or “Wine-drinker” on
vases by Exekias.[1104]

To the same class belong the names given to Nymphs of various kinds,
such as the Nereids (see p. 26) or the Hesperides. The latter are named
on one vase[1105] as Asterope, Chrysothemis, Hygieia, and Lipara; on
another[1106] as Aiopis, Antheia, Donakis, Kalypso, Mermesa, Nelisa,
and Tara.

Of more general signification, and sometimes perhaps to be regarded as
descriptive titles rather than names, are such as Archenautes
(Ship-captain),[1107] Komarchos (Master of Revels),[1108] or Paidagogos
(Tutor).[1109] On the other hand, Neanias, Komos, Paian (given to boys
at play),[1110] and Eutychia (on the tomb of a woman)[1111] may be
merely fanciful personal names.

-----

Footnote 621:

  B.M. B 589, B 693; B 180 (between vine-poles); Bibl. Nat. 176;
  Hartwig, pl. 30, fig. 2 (Hieron); Branteghem Coll. No. 28 (Hermaios);
  Athens 1583 = Rayet and Collignon, p. 291; _Amer. Journ. of Arch._
  1900, pl. 1, p. 185 (Duris in Boston).

Footnote 622:

  Petersburg 880 = Reinach, i. 13.

Footnote 623:

  B.M. F 194.

Footnote 624:

  B.M. E 257.

Footnote 625:

  _Wiener Vorl._ 1890–91, pl. 7, fig. 2 (Nikosthenes in Boston).

Footnote 626:

  B.M. E 439.

Footnote 627:

  B.M. E 362.

Footnote 628:

  Athens 1583 = Rayet and Collignon, p. 291.

Footnote 629:

  Bibl. Nat. 576 = Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 33, 1.

Footnote 630:

  Reinach, ii. 35.

Footnote 631:

  _Ibid._ i. 159.

Footnote 632:

  B.M. B 225, B 378, B 426, E 102; Louvre F 133; Petersburg 855 =
  Reinach, i. 18.

Footnote 633:

  B.M. E 429; Millin-Reinach, i. 60, ii. 17; Reinach, i. 168, ii. 302.

Footnote 634:

  Reinach, ii. 32 (cf. Triptolemos).

Footnote 635:

  _Bourguignon Sale Cat._ 57; _Mon. Grecs_, 1879, pl. 3.

Footnote 636:

  B.M. B 79.

Footnote 637:

  _Mus. Greg._ ii. 3, 3_E.g._.

Footnote 638:

  Munich 339 = Reinach, ii. 36 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1888, 7, 1.

Footnote 639:

  _Cat._ 969 = Reinach, i. 415: see p. 178.

Footnote 640:

  B.M. E 182; Bibl. Nat. 219 = _Mon. di Barone_, pl. 1; Reinach, i. 1
  and 3 = Petersburg 1792 and 1793; and see p. 19.

Footnote 641:

  B.M. E 492; Reinach, i. 93, 122; Helbig 103 = Rayet and Collignon, p.
  223.

Footnote 642:

  Petersburg 2007 = Reinach, i. 7.

Footnote 643:

  Bibl. Nat. 440 = Reinach, ii. 260.

Footnote 644:

  Reinach, i. 93.

Footnote 645:

  Baumeister, i. p. 434, fig. 483: cf. B.M. E 695 (doubtful).

Footnote 646:

  B.M. F 271; Naples 3219 = Reinach, i. 125 and 3237 =
  Millingen-Reinach, 1 = Baumeister, ii. p. 834, fig. 918.

Footnote 647:

  Naples 3237 = Millingen-Reinach, 2 = Baumeister, ii. p. 835, fig. 919.

Footnote 648:

  B.M. E 775 = Fig. 131; Munich 807 = Baumeister, ii. p. 1204, fig.
  1396; _Jahrbuch_, vii. (1892), pl. 5, p. 154 (Dionysos not present);
  and see below, p. 142.

Footnote 649:

  B.M. B 149, B 153, E 166.

Footnote 650:

  B.M. F 194 (D. with bull’s head).

Footnote 651:

  Naples S.A. 172 = Reinach, i. 498: cf. Louvre F 136 and F 311
  (Reinach, i. 144).

Footnote 652:

  Berlin 1904.

Footnote 653:

  B.M. B 347 (Hermes and Apollo); Bibl. Nat. 231; Athens 903 (Ares,
  Hermes, Herakles); Munich 157; Reinach, i. 8 (Petersburg 1807), 203,
  ii. 24, 42, and 75 (Munich 47, 609, 62), 30, 35, 74.

Footnote 654:

  B.M. B 302; E 66 (Herakles).

Footnote 655:

  B.M. E 410.

Footnote 656:

  B.M. B 200, B 201, B 318–21; Berlin 1961, 2278.

Footnote 657:

  Berlin 3257.

Footnote 658:

  Munich 773; and see Overbeck, _Her. Bildw._ p. 210.

Footnote 659:

  Berlin 1732 = Reinach, ii. 66.

Footnote 660:

  B.M. E 65.

Footnote 661:

  See p. 17.

Footnote 662:

  B.M. B 253, E 8, E 303, E 443;  Bibl. Nat. 230; and see p. 14.

Footnote 663:

  _Boston Mus. Report_, 1900, No. 14 (Maenads); Froehner, _Musées de
  France_, pl. 6 (Seileni).

Footnote 664:

  Petersburg 1600 = Reinach, i. 25; Bibl. Nat. 391 = Froehner, _Musées
  de France_, pl. 8.

Footnote 665:

  B.M. B 168 (?): see Reinach, ii. 38 and p. 30.

Footnote 666:

  B.M. E 445.

Footnote 667:

  B.M. B 203.

Footnote 668:

  B.M. E 444; Reinach, i. 203: see note 653, p. 56.

Footnote 669:

  Berlin 2179 = _Wiener Vorl._ iii. 6.

Footnote 670:

  B.M. F 171 (crowned by Nike); Athens 667; _Forman Sale Cat._ 356.

Footnote 671:

  Millin-Reinach, ii. 43 (doubtful); Baumeister, i. p. 618, fig. 687.

Footnote 672:

  B.M. B 198, B 256–59, E 129, E 279, F 307; Reinach, i. 161 =
  Baumeister, i. p. 441, fig. 491; Millin-Reinach, ii. 16, 49 A (D.
  throws himself into arms of A.).

Footnote 673:

  B.M. B 204, 206, 208, F 1, 69.

Footnote 674:

  Würzburg, Phineus cup = Reinach, i. 201 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold,
  pl. 41 (lions and stags).

Footnote 675:

  B.M. E 546; Jatta 1092 = Reinach, i. 482.

Footnote 676:

  Petersburg 1427 = Reinach, i. 18.

Footnote 677:

  Reinach, ii. 37, 6.

Footnote 678:

  B.M. B 179; Micali, _Storia_, 86.

Footnote 679:

  B.M. B 206.

Footnote 680:

  B.M. B 302, B 476, B 556; Bibl. Nat. 433 = Millin-Reinach, i. 38;
  Cambridge 48.

Footnote 681:

  Millin-Reinach, i. 37.

Footnote 682:

  Reinach, i. 215.

Footnote 683:

  B.F.: B.M. B 206, B 300 = Fig. 120, B 427; Reinach, ii. 141 and i.
  203 = _Wiener Vorl._ D. 1, 3 (D. in chariot). R.F.: B.M. E 16, 55,
  75, 228, 362, 462; Berlin 2471 = _Coll. Sabouroff_, i. 55; Bibl. Nat.
  357 = _Monuments Piot_, vii. pl. 2; Roscher, iii. p. 2118. Late: B.M.
  F 1, 77, 179, 303–4; Reinach, ii. 200. See also p. 61.

Footnote 684:

  See _B.M. Cat._ and Reinach, _E.g._; B.M. B 148, E 110, 253, 503, F
  149; Berlin 2174; Bibl. Nat. 222 = Reinach, ii. 251; Louvre F 3, F 5,
  F 101, F 124, F 204, G 43.

Footnote 685:

  B.M. E 350 (receiving wine from Nymph).

Footnote 686:

  B.M. E 184.

Footnote 687:

  Berlin 2402 = _Coll. Sabouroff_, i. 57; Berlin 2290 = Baumeister, i.
  p. 555, fig. 592 (Hieron); Reinach, ii. 155 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1889, 4,
  5 (Taleides), and ii. 289, 6.

Footnote 688:

  B.M. E 465, F 153.

Footnote 689:

  Reinach, ii. 301.

Footnote 690:

  B.M. E 511, F 56.

Footnote 691:

  B.M. F 37, 275; in F 273 Ariadne similarly occupied.

Footnote 692:

  B.M. E 66, E 786.

Footnote 693:

  _Anzeiger_, 1895, p. 40.

Footnote 694:

  _Jahrbuch_, i. (1886), p. 278: cf. B.M. F 188.

Footnote 695:

  Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 6 = Louvre G 34.

Footnote 696:

  _Ibid._ pls. 38–39, 1, and see p. 181.

Footnote 697:

  Athens 1282–83 = _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1895, p. 98.

Footnote 698:

  B.M. E 703, F 152; Millin-Reinach, ii. 16 and ii. 40.

Footnote 699:

  B.M. F 114; Millin-Reinach, ii. 21.

Footnote 700:

  Reinach, ii. 38.

Footnote 701:

  B.M. B 210; _Bourguignon Sale Cat._ 18 (both Exekias).

Footnote 702:

  B.M. E 228, 241, 435, F 163, 270; Reinach, ii. 301;
  Millingen-Reinach, 2.

Footnote 703:

  B.M. E 228, F 203, F 253.

Footnote 704:

  B.M. F 437.

Footnote 705:

  Petersburg 2161.

Footnote 706:

  B.M. F 83, 381.

Footnote 707:

  B.M. F 163; Munich 848 = Reinach, i. 383.

Footnote 708:

  Naples 3240 = Reinach, i. 114 = Baumeister, i. pl. 5, fig. 422.

Footnote 709:

  Minervini, _Mon. du Barone_, pl. 7.

Footnote 710:

  B.M. E 451–52, 471; Berlin 1930, 2290 (= _Wiener Vorl._ A. 4); Naples
  2419 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pls. 36–7 (see Vol. I. p. 141);
  Schreiber-Anderson, pl. 14, 8.

Footnote 711:

  Berlin 2029; Naples 2411 = Reinach, i. 154.

Footnote 712:

  Bologna 286.

Footnote 713:

  B.M. B 332.

Footnote 714:

  See p. 17; and cf. B.M. B 42 (Plate XXI.).

Footnote 715:

  See pp 22, 76; also Berlin 2591.

Footnote 716:

  Froehner, _Musées de France_, pl. 21 and p. 69 ff.; Reinach, i. 144,
  228; Harrison, _Prolegomena to Gk. Religion_, p. 277; and see pp. 29,
  73.

Footnote 717:

  See p. 60, note 710.

Footnote 718:

  B.M. E 505.

Footnote 719:

  Reinach, i. 472, ii. 198.

Footnote 720:

  B.M. B 203–4, 206, 427, F 58, 77, 80–1, 156.

Footnote 721:

  B.M. F 75–6, 276; Louvre F 120, F 124 (= _Wiener Vorl._ 1890, 5, 3),
  G 33, G 57; Naples 3113, 3241 (= Reinach, i. 384); Munich 184 =
  Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 46 (Hieron); _Gaz. Arch._ 1887, 15
  (Hieron in Brussels); Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pls. 6, 31–2.

Footnote 722:

  Hartwig, _E.g._ pl. 5; _Wiener Vorl._ E. 12, 1; _Mus. Greg._ ii. 79,
  2_E.g._; B.M. B 297 (Plate XXX.); Satyr as single figure, Louvre G 24.

Footnote 723:

  B.M. E 35, E 768; Hartwig, _E.g._ pl. 45 (Hieron); Cambridge 48.

Footnote 724:

  B.M. F 133; Naples 2419 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 37; _Forman
  Sale Cat._ 352.

Footnote 725:

  B.M. B 296; Reinach, ii. 75 (Munich 62), 141; Karlsruhe 259 =
  Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 30; _Amer. Journ. of Arch._ 1900, pp.
  188–189; Vienna 231.

Footnote 726:

  Louvre F 334.

Footnote 727:

  B.M. B 426; Bibl. Nat. 320; Petersburg 9 = Reinach, ii. 24; _J.H.S._
  1899, pl. 5; _Wiener Vorl._ 1890–91, pl. 3, 2 (Nikosthenes).

Footnote 728:

  B.M. E 510.

Footnote 729:

  B.M. E 437, E 439, F 49, F 227.

Footnote 730:

  B.M. E 319; _Mus. Greg._ ii. 72, 2_E.g._; Munich 408 = Furtwaengler
  and Reichhold, pls. 44–5.

Footnote 731:

  B.M. E 555; Berlin 2241; Naples S.A. 313; Reinach, i. 340, ii. 261
  (Bibl. Nat. 852).

Footnote 732:

  B.M. B 265, E 368; Bibl. Nat. 539 = Reinach, ii. 261; _Él. Cér._ i.
  45; Louvre F 161, F 381, G 34 (= Hartwig, pl. 6), G 46.

Footnote 733:

  B.M. F 192; Munich 184 = Furtwaengler-Reichhold, pl. 46 (Hieron);
  Reinach, i. 223 = _Wiener Vorl._ D. 5; and cf. Adamek, _Vasen des
  Amasis_, pl. 2 (in Berlin).

Footnote 734:

  _Sale Cal. Hôtel Drouot_, 11 May, 1903, No. 62.

Footnote 735:

  Reinach, i. 201.

Footnote 736:

  Roscher, i. 1998.

Footnote 737:

  Munich 332 = Baumeister, ii. p. 847, fig. 928.

Footnote 738:

  B.M. E 253, and cf. E 510; Bibl. Nat. 357 = _Monuments Piot_, vii.
  pl. 3; Munich 372 = Reinach, ii. 117; and cf. _J.H.S._ xix. p. 220.

Footnote 739:

  B.M. E 357; Karlsruhe 242; Reinach, i. 281 (?); Hartwig,
  _Meistersch._ p. 32.

Footnote 740:

  Athens 1353 = _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1895, p. 95; Bibl. Nat. 357 =
  _Monuments Piot_, vii. pl. 2; Munich 807 = Millingen-Reinach, pl. 5.

Footnote 741:

  Louvre F 311 = Reinach, i. 144.

Footnote 742:

  B.M. B 284 (?), B 486 (?); Reinach, ii. 77; Millin-Reinach, ii. 12.

Footnote 743:

  B.M. B 515, E 567.

Footnote 744:

  Millin-Reinach, ii. 49 A.

Footnote 745:

  Munich 542; Stackelberg, 24; _Forman Sale Cat._ 331 (as racing
  charioteers, driving Maenads).

Footnote 746:

  B.M. E 377; Louvre G 73 (trumpeting); Froehner, _Musées de France_,
  pl. 6; and see p. 56, note 663.

Footnote 747:

  B.M. E 3 (with pelta and trumpet); Louvre G 89.

Footnote 748:

  B.M. E 539.

Footnote 749:

  Millin-Reinach, i. 20.

Footnote 750:

  Inghirami, _Mus. Chius._ 208.

Footnote 751:

  B.M. E 487.

Footnote 752:

  B.M. E 108.

Footnote 753:

  See Vol. I. p. 216, Fig. 68.

Footnote 754:

  Berlin 2589 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1684, fig. 1766.

Footnote 755:

  Helbig, 186 = _Mus. Greg._ ii. 80, 1_E.g._.

Footnote 756:

  Berlin 2550.

Footnote 757:

  B.M. B 148.

Footnote 758:

  Berlin 2578.

Footnote 759:

  B.M. B 168; Reinach, ii. 98; with a mouse, Reinach, i. 500.

Footnote 760:

  B.M. E 102; B 168.

Footnote 761:

  B.M. E 139, E 338.

Footnote 762:

  Millingen-Reinach, 59.

Footnote 763:

  _Boston Mus. Report_, 1900, No. 14.

Footnote 764:

  Inghirami, _Vasi Fitt._ ii. 199.

Footnote 765:

  Berlin 2240; B.M. F 363; _Wiener Vorl._ C. 7, 1; Hartwig,
  _Meistersch._ pl. 45, p. 28; _Forman Sale Cat._ 331.

Footnote 766:

  B.M. E 24, E 261; Hartwig, _E.g._

Footnote 767:

  Munich 139; Reinach, i. 460; Hartwig, pls. 7 and 44, 1.

Footnote 768:

  B.M. E 35, E 530, E 768.

Footnote 769:

  Berlin 2267 = Hartwig, _E.g._ pl. 2, 1.

Footnote 770:

  Reinach, ii. 303.

Footnote 771:

  _Bourguignon Cat._ 57; Louvre G 91.

Footnote 772:

  B.M. E 387, E 467.

Footnote 773:

  B.M. B 560, E 583; Berlin 2243; Louvre F 204 = _Amer. Journ. of
  Arch._ 1896, p. 14; Baumeister, i. p. 555, fig. 592.

Footnote 774:

  Naples 3235 = Reinach, i. 103 = Roscher, iii. 861.

Footnote 775:

  _J.H.S._ vii. pl. 62, p. 54.

Footnote 776:

  B.M. F 273; Reinach, ii. 201, 235; Naples 2846; _Bourguignon Cat._
  41, 57.

Footnote 777:

  See Loeschcke in _Ath. Mitth._ 1894, p. 521.

Footnote 778:

  Vol. I. pp. 353, 355, and p. 208 below.

Footnote 779:

  See generally Heydemann, _Satyr- u. Bakchennamen_.

Footnote 780:

  _Cat._ 2471.

Footnote 781:

  Reinach, ii. 268.

Footnote 782:

  E 65.

Footnote 783:

  See also Jatta Coll. 1093; B.M. E 253; Naples 2369; Roscher, iii. p.
  2118; De Witte, _Coll. à l’Hôtel Lambert_, pls. 13, 27. For Terpon
  see also Reinach, i. 203, and Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 6.

Footnote 784:

  B.M. E 253.

Footnote 785:

  Reinach, i. 249; Roscher, iii. p. 2115.

Footnote 786:

  De Witte, _Coll. à l’Hôtel Lambert_, 27.

Footnote 787:

  Reinach, ii. 200.

Footnote 788:

  Munich 384 = Reinach, i. 130 (see Heydemann, _E.g._ pp. 25, 36: cf.
  Hydris, B.M. E 65).

Footnote 789:

  Heydemann, _Satyr- u. Bakchennamen_, p. 29 (_E.g._).

Footnote 790:

  B.M. E 82; Berlin 2471, 2532; Naples 2369; Reinach, i. 426, ii. 6,
  38, 200.

Footnote 791:

  Berlin 2532.

Footnote 792:

  Reinach, ii. 287 (name also read as Molpos).

Footnote 793:

  _Ibid._ ii. 302.

Footnote 794:

  Berlin 2160.

Footnote 795:

  Munich 780; Naples 2369, 3235; Jatta 1093; Reinach, ii. 268.

Footnote 796:

  Naples 3235.

Footnote 797:

  Bologna 286.

Footnote 798:

  Naples 2369.

Footnote 799:

  Heydemann, _E.g._ p. 28 (x).

Footnote 800:

  Jatta 1093; Reinach, ii. 302.

Footnote 801:

  Jatta 1093.

Footnote 802:

  Berlin 3257.

Footnote 803:

  B.M. E 253.

Footnote 804:

  Reinach, ii. 6.

Footnote 805:

  Jatta 1093.

Footnote 806:

  Reinach, ii. 3 = Millin-Reinach, i. 9; Reinach, ii. 38.

Footnote 807:

  Heydemann, _E.g._ p. 29 (ß).

Footnote 808:

  _Ibid._ (a).

Footnote 809:

  B.M. E 492; Naples 2419; Karlsruhe 208; De Witte, _Coll. à l’Hôtel
  Lambert_, 13.

Footnote 810:

  B.M. E 350: cf. Nymphe on Berlin 2471.

Footnote 811:

  Jatta 1093.

Footnote 812:

  B.M. E 182; Heydemann, p. 20 (X) = Dubois-Maisonneuve, _Introd._ 22.

Footnote 813:

  Naples S.A. 316; Heydemann, p. 19 (U).

Footnote 814:

  Heydemann. p. 19 (U).

Footnote 815:

  Gerhard, _Ant. Bildw._ pl. 59.

Footnote 816:

  Naples S.A. 172 = Reinach, i. 498.

Footnote 817:

  _Pourtalès Cat._ 29, 2.

Footnote 818:

  Naples 3235, 2419.

Footnote 819:

  Heydemann, p. 29 (z).

Footnote 820:

  Naples 2883.

Footnote 821:

  _Strena Helbigiana_, p. 111 = _Boston Mus. Report_, 1900, No. 20.

Footnote 822:

  B.M. E 183.

Footnote 823:

  B.M. B 261, B 425, F 332 (Plate XLV.).

Footnote 824:

  Munich 728; _Mus. Greg._ ii. 21, 1; and see Nos. 1–7 in the list
  given below.

Footnote 825:

  B.M. E 82, F 68.

Footnote 826:

  B.M. B 425: cf. _Mus. Greg._ ii. 21, 1.

Footnote 827:

  Millin-Reinach, ii. 10; _Ber. d. sächs. Gesellsch._ 1855, pls. 1–2.

Footnote 828:

  Roscher, i. p. 1802.

Footnote 829:

  See below, p. 99, and _J.H.S._ xviii. p. 296 (Hades is frequently
  present).

Footnote 830:

  See Nos. 1–4, 7, 8, 11; for Eurydike, Nos. 7–9.

Footnote 831:

  See Nos. 1–3 and 12–14; also Munich 153, and Louvre F 382.

Footnote 832:

  See No. 1; for the rock version of the legend, cf. Pind. _Ol._ i. 90.

Footnote 833:

  Nos. 2, 3, 5, 6; B.M. F 210; Munich 153 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1924,
  fig. 2040; Reinach, i. 408 (parody).

Footnote 834:

  Nos. 3, 4, 9 (P. only), and 11.

Footnote 835:

  No. 10.

Footnote 836:

  No. 1.

Footnote 837:

  Nos. 1, 2, 5, 9.

Footnote 838:

  Nos. 1–6, 10, 11.

Footnote 839:

  Nos. 1, 4, 10.

Footnote 840:

  No. 2 (see Baumeister, iii. p. 1928).

Footnote 841:

  No. 3.

Footnote 842:

  Nos. 1–5, 8.

Footnote 843:

  Nos. 3, 6, 10.

Footnote 844:

  Nos. 2, 3, 9.

Footnote 845:

  No. 11.

Footnote 846:

  See Nos. 5 and 8.

Footnote 847:

  Nos. 1–3: cf. _Od._ xi. 269, and Paus. x. 29, 7.

Footnote 848:

  No. 2.

Footnote 849:

  No. 1.

Footnote 850:

  Reinach, i. 408 (parody): cf. Paus. x. 29, 1.

Footnote 851:

  B.M. E 155; Berlin 3023 = Reinach, i. 330 = Baumeister, i. p. 767,
  fig. 821; and No. 5 above.

Footnote 852:

  B.M. D 61; Berlin 2455, 2680, 2681 (= Reinach, i, 457); Munich 209 =
  Baumeister, i. p. 378, fig. 414 (Fig. 122); Athens 1660–62 (= _Ant.
  Denkm._ i. 23); _ibid._ 1663, 1665 (= _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ i. pls.
  1–2).

Footnote 853:

  B.M. F 486; Vienna 448 = Reinach, i. 343; Reinach, i. 220; Helbig,
  121 = Reinach, ii. 121 is doubtful.

Footnote 854:

  Bibl. Nat. 918 = Reinach, i. 395 = Dennis, _Etruria_, ii.
  frontispiece.

Footnote 855:

  Bibl. Nat. 920 = Reinach, i. 88.

Footnote 856:

  See above, p. 69, note 838.

Footnote 857:

  See No. 5 above.

Footnote 858:

  See below, p. 138.

Footnote 859:

  _Boston Mus. Report_ for 1899, No. 38.

Footnote 860:

  Reinach, i. 475.

Footnote 861:

  _Ibid._ i. 204, 290 (Berlin 3072).

Footnote 862:

  Naples 3221 = _Ibid._ i. 402.

Footnote 863:

  B.M. F 155: see below, p. 141.

Footnote 864:

  No. 8 above.

Footnote 865:

  Bibl. Nat. 269.

Footnote 866:

  See above, p. 69, note 843.

Footnote 867:

  B.M. F 68; Petersburg 525 = Reinach, i. 11.

Footnote 868:

  B.M. E 183; Reinach, ii. 324.

Footnote 869:

  Petersburg 1792 = Reinach, i. 1: cf. _Rev. Arch._ xxxvi. (1900), p.
  93.

Footnote 870:

  B.M. F 277; Reinach, i. 99 (and see i. 155); _E.g._ i. 522, 1, and
  Baumeister, i. p. 423, fig. 463.

Footnote 871:

  _Él. Cér._ iii. 37 A.

Footnote 872:

  See Ubell, _Thanatos_, p. 22 ff. He doubts the possibility of the
  identification of Thanatos on Greek vases.

Footnote 873:

  Athens 1093 = Roscher, ii. 2678; Reinach, i. 149 = Baumeister, i. p.
  727, fig. 781: cf. Louvre F 388 (where Pottier identifies the warrior
  as Sarpedon).

Footnote 874:

  B.M. D 58 (= Fig. 123), E 12 (= _Wiener Vorl._ D. pl. 3, figs. 1–2);
  Athens 1654 = Dumont-Pottier, i. pl. 29; _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1893, p.
  86 (in Berlin); with body of woman, Athens 1653 = Dumont-Pottier, i.
  pls. 27–28, and _Jahrbuch_, 1895, pl. 2. All but two of these are
  funeral lekythi.

Footnote 875:

  Reinach, i. 278.

Footnote 876:

  B.M. E 155.

Footnote 877:

  Berlin 2157 = _Jahrbuch_, i. p. 211; _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1895, p. 37
  (see under Herakles, p. 103, note 1172).

Footnote 878:

  See _J.H.S._ xii. p. 340 (Ker seizing soul of fallen warrior); also
  for a Ker in combats, Reinach, ii. 63, 126 (Munich 781), 97 (in the
  latter case protecting Aeneas against Diomede); also i. 113 (Berlin
  1713, 1714), 223, where they represent demons of good or evil
  according to the will of the gods.

Footnote 879:

  See Robert, _Thanatos_, and _J.H.S._ xii. p. 345. The Ker hovering
  over Alkyoneus (see below, p. 100) in Reinach, i. 255, 451, may be a
  Hypnos (see Koepp in _Arch. Zeit._ 1884, p. 42 ff.).

Footnote 880:

  B.M. D 54; Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ pls. 14, 33; Athens 688 =
  Reinach, i. 165 = Roscher, ii. 1147; Stackelberg, pl. 48: and cf.
  Reinach, i. 347 (= _Bourguignon Cat._ 19) and Benndorf, _E.g._ pl.
  42, 2; in the former the soul is armed; in the latter the winged
  figure may be the ???. There often seems to be a confusion between
  the e?d???? or ghost and the ??? or ?a?µ??, both in its functions and
  its art-form. Thus, on the vase given in _J.H.S._ xx. p. 101 (see p.
  52), small winged figures like souls are seen flying out of the jar,
  which are here intended to represent evil spirits or maleficent
  ghosts, like the evils let out of the jar by Pandora.

Footnote 881:

  B.M. B 639; Reinach, i. 89; Millin-Reinach, i. 19.

Footnote 882:

  B.M. B 240, B 543; Berlin 1921.

Footnote 883:

  Fig. 112, p. 14; Naples 2883 = Reinach, i. 181: cf. the beautiful
  conception on the Pergamene frieze.

Footnote 884:

  B.M. E 182 and Petersburg 1792 = Reinach, i. 1; Reinach, i. 66, 113,
  208.

Footnote 885:

  B.M. E 278, Reinach, i. 244 (Louvre E 864), 245, 249; B.M. B 196.

Footnote 886:

  B.M. B 168, B 213; _Él. Cér._ ii. 1, 2.

Footnote 887:

  Bibl. Nat. 298 = Reinach, i. 249, 4 = _J.H.S._ xx. p. 106, fig. 2
  (and cf. _ibid._ xix. p. 235); Naples 3355 = Reinach, i. 248; _Él.
  Cér._ i. 53 = Reinach, i. 249, 6: cf. also B.M. F 147; Froehner,
  _Musées de France_, p. 69; Harrison, _Prolegomena to Gk. Religion_,
  p. 277; and see above, p. 29.

Footnote 888:

  As on the vase _J.H.S._ xxi. pl. 1, p. 5: cf. Schol. in Ar. _Av._
  971, and Sophocles’ drama of _Pandora or the Hammerers_ (Sf?????p??):
  see also _Jahrbuch_, vi. (1891), p. 113 ff., and for another
  explanation, Robert, _Arch. Märchen_, p. 194 ff. A vase in Berlin
  (_Cat._ 2646 = Reinach, i. 229 = _J.H.S._ xix. p. 232) represents the
  ???d?? of Ge-Pandora, with Satyrs astonished at the sight.

Footnote 889:

  Munich 558; Naples S.A. 287; Reinach, i. 129.

Footnote 890:

  Hes. _Theog._ 116; Ar. _Av._ 696 ff.

Footnote 891:

  _Gaz. Arch._ 1875, pl. 9.

Footnote 892:

  Roscher, ii. p. 1550.

Footnote 893:

  B.M. E 246: see _J.H.S._ xi. p. 343.

Footnote 894:

  Berlin 2538 = Reinach, ii. 162.

Footnote 895:

  Petersburg 1793 = Reinach, i. 3; but see below, p. 125.

Footnote 896:

  Petersburg 1807 = Reinach, i. 7.

Footnote 897:

  B.M. B 49 = Reinach, ii. 122; Millin-Reinach, i. 50.

Footnote 898:

  See _Ath. Mitth._ xiii. (1888), p. 412 ff. and _J.H.S._ xiii. p. 77
  ff.; also Vol. I. p. 391.

Footnote 899:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1888, pl. 9.

Footnote 900:

  B.M. F 270: see Daremberg and Saglio, _Dict._, _E.g._ Cabeiri.

Footnote 901:

  See above, p. 73, note 888, for representations of Ge-Pandora rising
  from the earth, which may be considered in connection with the
  creation of Pandora.

Footnote 902:

  D 4.

Footnote 903:

  E 467, 789; _J.H.S._ xxi. pl. 1 (here P. rises out of the ground,
  assisted by Epimetheus with his hammer; Zeus and Hermes are present).

Footnote 904:

  _J.H.S._ xx. p. 101: see above, p. 52.

Footnote 905:

  Bibl. Nat. 542 = Reinach, i. 141.

Footnote 906:

  Berlin 1722 = _Wiener Vorl._ D. 9, 8, and another B.F. vase in
  Reinach, i. 388; _Jahrbuch_, iv. (1889), pls. 5–6, fig. 1.

Footnote 907:

  Helbig, 275 = Reinach, ii. 48 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1411, fig. 1567.

Footnote 908:

  B.M. F 148; Naples 3255 = Reinach, i. 236.

Footnote 909:

  Berlin 3245 = Gerhard, _Ges. Akad. Abhandl._ pl. 19; Athens 957 =
  _J.H.S._ xiii. pl. 3 (H. bears the heavens).

Footnote 910:

  Reinach, i. 471.

Footnote 911:

  Athens 1926 = Reinach, i. 515. Possibly also on a Berlin vase (_Arch.
  Anzeiger_, 1890, p. 89) with a similar subject, which may, however,
  denote a “sepulchral banquet.” See Harrison, _Prolegomena to Gk.
  Religion_, p. 349.

Footnote 912:

  B.M. E 224, E 698.

Footnote 913:

  B.M. B 218, 244 (Fig. 113), E 410; Louvre E 861 and Berlin 1704 =
  Reinach, i. 156, 198.

Footnote 914:

  Athens 1962.

Footnote 915:

  _Ibid._ 466 = Plate XLVII.

Footnote 916:

  B.M. E 720; Munich 351 = Reinach, ii. 46; Berlin 2248 = Benndorf,
  _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ 27, 2; Bibl. Nat. 841 = Millin-Reinach, i. 62;
  Roscher, ii. p. 350 (with tablets; B.F. in Louvre).

Footnote 917:

  Reinach, ii. 324; _ibid._ 325 = _Él. Cér._ i. 32 (may be Nike).

Footnote 918:

  B.M. E 67; Bibl. Nat. 444; Reinach, i. 99, 339, 463: and see _Arch.
  Anzeiger_, 1895, p. 38 (Berlin).

Footnote 919:

  B.M. E 65 = Reinach, i. 193; Berlin 2591: cf. Bibl. Nat. 840 =
  Reinach, ii. 260.

Footnote 920:

  _J.H.S._ i. pl. 3.

Footnote 921:

  B.M. E 467.

Footnote 922:

  Berlin 1895.

Footnote 923:

  François vase.

Footnote 924:

  Reinach, i. 301.

Footnote 925:

  B.M. R.F. amphora (uncatalogued).

Footnote 926:

  Reinach, ii. 34.

Footnote 927:

  _Ibid._ ii. 296: see p. 39.

Footnote 928:

  _Ibid._ ii. 47.

Footnote 929:

  _Ibid._ ii. 279.

Footnote 930:

  B.M. E 381(?); _Él. Cér._ i. 20, 31 (= Reinach, ii. 9), 33 (= _E.g._
  ii. 321).

Footnote 931:

  B.F. (H. in chariot): B.M. B 201, 317; Bibl. Nat. 253 = Reinach, i.
  399; Reinach, ii. 76, 161. In Olympos: B.F.: B.M. B 379. R.F.:
  Reinach, ii. 186.

Footnote 932:

  Berlin 3257 = Baumeister, i. p. 630, fig. 700; _Forman Sale Cat._
  364; Reinach, ii. 8: see p. 108.

Footnote 933:

  Berlin 2278 = _Ant. Denkm._ i. 9; Reinach, i. 157, 203; Roscher, iii.
  p. 2119 (with Aphrodite).

Footnote 934:

  Jatta 1093; Reinach, i. 175.

Footnote 935:

  Petersburg 1807 = Reinach, i. 7.

Footnote 936:

  _Mon. Grecs_, 1889–90, p. 5 ff.: see also on the subject generally
  the article _Personifikationen_ in Roscher’s _Lexikon_.

Footnote 937:

  _Él. Cér._ ii. 62 = Reinach, ii. 287: see above, p. 32.

Footnote 938:

  B.F.: Berlin 1983; Bibl. Nat. 220 and Reinach, ii. 211 = _Él. Cér._
  ii. 115–116 (in the former case the solar disc is on his head). Late:
  B.M. F 305; Reinach, i. 258 (Karlsruhe 388), 368; Millin-Reinach, i.
  16, ii. 49.

Footnote 939:

  Reinach, i. 99, 100, 312 (Naples 3222), 291 = _Él. Cér._ ii. 114
  (Hemera); Inghirami, _Vasi Fitt._ 394 (?see p. 79, note 954). In the
  last but one they step out of a boat.

Footnote 940:

  Reinach, i. 232.

Footnote 941:

  B.M. E 466 = Plate LIII. A general view in colours, _Art Journal_,
  Sept. 1904.

Footnote 942:

  Reinach, i. 99.

Footnote 943:

  _Ibid._ i. 100.

Footnote 944:

  _Ibid._ i. 125.

Footnote 945:

  _Wiener Vorl._ E. 11 = _Jahrbuch_, 1894, p. 252.

Footnote 946:

  Reinach, i. 236.

Footnote 947:

  _Ibid._ i. 109.

Footnote 948:

  Cambridge 100 = Stackelberg, pl. 15; Athens 900 = _J.H.S._ xix. pl. 9.

Footnote 949:

  B.M. E 252, 466, 776; Berlin 2519 = _Coll. Sabouroff_, i. 63;
  Reinach, i. 312 (Naples 3222), 451.

Footnote 950:

  Berlin 2293 = _J.H.S._ xix. p. 268 (a fine R.F. kylix); Athens 1345 =
  _J.H.S._ xix. pl. 10. The figure in the chariot may be perhaps
  identified as Nyx; see Berlin 2519, where Selene rides a horse and
  another goddess drives a chariot; also B.M. E 776. See _Art Journal_,
  Sept. 1904, p. 290.

Footnote 951:

  Petersburg 1793 = Reinach, i. 3.

Footnote 952:

  Reinach, i. 402.

Footnote 953:

  _Ibid._ ii. 319 = _Él. Cér._ ii. 118.

Footnote 954:

  B.M. E 466 (Plate LIII.); Naples 3256 = Reinach, i. 100 (here as
  stars).

Footnote 955:

  B.M. E 466; Reinach, i. 236, 291 (?), 339; Inghirami, _Vasi Fitt._
  iv. 394 (?).

Footnote 956:

  Bibl. Nat. 449 = Reinach, i. 129: cf. B.M. F 573, E 658, E 659, and
  _Art Journal_, Sept. 1904, p. 289.

Footnote 957:

  But see above, note 950; p. 30, note 239.

Footnote 958:

  R.F.: B.M. E 449, E 776 (? Nyx; see above); Helbig, 132 = Reinach,
  ii. 46. Late: Millin-Reinach, ii. 37 (with Hermes; vase by Lasimos in
  Louvre).

Footnote 959:

  Millingen, _Anc. Uned. Mon._ i. 6 = _Él. Cér._ ii. 108 A = Roscher,
  i. 1257; De Witte, _Coll. à l’Hôtel Lambert_, pl. 6.

Footnote 960:

  B.F.: Louvre E 702 = Reinach, i. 354. R.F.: B.M. E 72, 466; Reinach,
  i. 463 (= Bibl. Nat. 423), and ii. 81 (= Helbig, 80); Reinach, i. 107
  = Hartwig, _Meistersch_. pls. 39–40 (by Hieron; may be either K. or
  T.); Bibl. Nat. 374 = Millin-Reinach, ii. 34. Late: Millin-Reinach,
  i. 48. Eos carrying K.: Berlin 2537 = Reinach, i. 208.

Footnote 961:

  Oxford 275 = _J.H.S._ xiii. p. 137; Bibl. Nat. 846.

Footnote 962:

  B.M. F 149.

Footnote 963:

  Reinach, ii. 105; B.M. E 468: see Reinach, i. 144, ii. 254 (Bibl.
  Nat. 207).

Footnote 964:

  Reinach, i. 156, 1.

Footnote 965:

  Reinach, i. 347 = _Bourguignon Sale Cat._ 19; Millingen, _Anc. Uned.
  Mon._ i. pl. 5; Roscher, i. 1265 = _Wiener Vorl._ vi. 7.

Footnote 966:

  B.M. B 104 = Vol. I. p. 351; and cf. _Él. Cér._ iii. 31 ff.

Footnote 967:

  B.M. B 431, B 445; _Forman Sale Cat._ 318.

Footnote 968:

  B.M. F 237.

Footnote 969:

  B.M. B 212.

Footnote 970:

  B.M. F 39; Berlin 2305 = Hartwig, _Meistersch_. pl. 72, 1; _ibid._
  pl. 22, 1 (see p. 47, note 50612); and cf. Reinach, ii. 248;
  _Philologus_, 1893, p. 211.

Footnote 971:

  B.M. D 59.

Footnote 972:

  B.M. E 480, E 512; _J.H.S._ xviii. pl. 6; Berlin 2165 = Reinach, i.
  352; Munich 376 = Reinach, i. 240 = Baumeister, i. p. 352, fig. 373;
  Reinach, i. 305; Helbig, 101 = Reinach, ii. 78 = _Wiener Vorl._ ii.
  9; Rayet and Collignon, p. 299 (in Louvre).

Footnote 973:

  Berlin 2165 = Reinach, i. 352.

Footnote 974:

  Reinach, i. 346: cf. Serv. _ad Aen._ iii. 209; _Ann. dell’ Inst._
  1882, p. 90 ff.; Roscher, iii. p. 1566.

Footnote 975:

  B.M. B 4, B 104: see Studniczka, _Kyrene_, p. 26, and _J.H.S._ xiii.
  p. 109 ff.

Footnote 976:

  See below pagelink?], pp. 115, 116.

Footnote 977:

  B.M. E 804 = _J.H.S._ xiii. p. 135.

Footnote 978:

  B.M. F 277.

Footnote 979:

  B.M. F 149.

Footnote 980:

  Munich 384 = Reinach, i. 130; Reinach, i. 481.

Footnote 981:

  De Witte, _Coll. à l’Hôtel Lambert_, pl. 11: cf. Reinach, i. 1.

Footnote 982:

  B.M. E 228 (see note in _Cat._); F 381.

Footnote 983:

  See especially Studniczka, _Kyrene_, and on the subject generally,
  _J.H.S._ ix. p. 47 ff.

Footnote 984:

  Naples 3253 = Reinach, i. 194.

Footnote 985:

  Naples 3256 = Reinach, i. 98.

Footnote 986:

  B.M. F 271.

Footnote 987:

  B.M. E 140 = Plate LI.

Footnote 988:

  Naples 3226 = Millingen, _Anc. Uned. Mon._ i. pl. 27; Millin-Reinach,
  ii. 7 (in Louvre); Berlin 2634 = Roscher, ii. 837.

Footnote 989:

  G 104.

Footnote 990:

  B.M. B 319; Naples 3255 = Reinach, i. 235; _ibid._ i. 466 (Petersburg
  523), ii. 51.

Footnote 991:

  B.M. E 48, 74, 84; _Ant. Denkm._ ii. 1: see _Arch. Zeit._ 1885, p.
  116, and Loeschcke in _Dorpater Programm_ for 1887.

Footnote 992:

  _Boston Mus. Report_, 1900, p. 63.

Footnote 993:

  B.M. B 4, B 6. See Vol. I. p. 341 ff.

Footnote 994:

  See above, pp. 19, 24.

Footnote 995:

  See above, p. 19.

Footnote 996:

  Reinach, ii. 144: see Paus. iii. 1, 2, and 18, 10; Apollod. iii. 10,
  3, 1; Hartwig, _Meistersch._ p. 491, note.

Footnote 997:

  De Witte, _Coll. à l’Hôtel Lambert_, pl. 28.

Footnote 998:

  Jatta 1501 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 38.

Footnote 999:

  Naples 3235 = Reinach, i. 103 = Roscher, iii. 861.

Footnote 1000:

  B.M. E 437 (fish-body); and see p. 101.

Footnote 1001:

  Petersburg 350 = Reinach, i. 12.

Footnote 1002:

  Naples 3226 = Millingen, _Anc. Uned. Mon._ i. pl. 27 (Ismenos and
  Krenaia): cf. Millin-Reinach, ii. 7. The nymph Dirke is, according to
  Robert, represented in the figure rising from the ground to receive
  the child Dionysos at his birth on the vase Petersburg 1792 = Reinach
  i. 1 (otherwise Gaia): see his _Arch. Märchen_, p. 185.

Footnote 1003:

  _Él. Cér._ ii. 86; Munich 805 = Reinach, i. 391 (see _ibid._ p. 277)
  = _Wiener Vorl._ iv. 4.

Footnote 1004:

  François vase (at Peleus and Thetis’ nuptials); B.M. E 805; Berlin
  2391, 2401 (Klio and Terpsichore): cf. _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1895,
  p. 102 (in Louvre; three figures named Ourania, Kalliope, and
  Melpomene).

Footnote 1005:

  B.M. E 271.

Footnote 1006:

  Reinach, i. 526 = Jatta 1538.

Footnote 1007:

  See p. 32.

Footnote 1008:

  F 478; and see Jatta 654 = _Gaz. Arch._ 1880, pl. 19, for a possible
  instance.

Footnote 1009:

  Berlin 2278 = _Ant. Denkm._ i. 9.

Footnote 1010:

  Petersburg 350 = Reinach, i. 12.

Footnote 1011:

  Louvre E 861 = Reinach, i. 156.

Footnote 1012:

  See p. 70; and also p. 137, under Orestes.

Footnote 1013:

  B.M. E 290.

Footnote 1014:

  Reinach, i. 255, 451 (but see note 879 on p. 72).

Footnote 1015:

  Reinach, i. 222 = Plate XXXIX.; _Boston Mus. Report_, 1900, No. 25.

Footnote 1016:

  B.M. E 12; Reinach, i. 149 = Baumeister, i. p. 727, fig. 781.

Footnote 1017:

  B.M. D 58 = Fig. 123; _Jahrbuch_, 1895, pl. 2; Dumont-Pottier, i.
  pls. 27–8.

Footnote 1018:

  Berlin 2661 = Rayet and Collignon, p. 257. For Ploutos see also
  Reinach, i. 1 (at birth of Dionysos), and the following notes.

Footnote 1019:

  Munich 291 = Reinach, ii. 47 (more probably Iris).

Footnote 1020:

  _Rev. Arch._ xxxvi. (1900), p. 93.

Footnote 1021:

  See _e.g._ B.M. E 287, E 574 (Plate XXXVI.), E 643; Oxford 312–314.

Footnote 1022:

  Studniczka, _Siegesgöttin_ (1898), and in Roscher’s _Lexikon_, iii.
  p. 318: see also Sikes, _Nike of Archermos_ (Cambridge, 1890), and
  _J.H.S._ xiii. p. 111 ff. Studniczka regards the following as certain
  B.F. instances: B.M. B 1, B 106_{3}, B 125_{2}, B 334; _Jahrbuch_,
  1889, pls. 5–6, figs. 2, 2a; Jahn, _Entführung d. Europa_, pl. 5. The
  instances on late careless B.F. vases, such as B 356, B 357, B 652 in
  B.M., are not to the point, as these belong to the fifth century.

Footnote 1023:

  B.M. E 444; Reinach, i. 157, 1; _Mus. Greg._ ii. 21, 1; Berlin 2278 =
  _Ant. Denkm._ i. 9.

Footnote 1024:

  _Él. Cér._ i. 14 (in B.M.); Reinach, i. 66, 194, 417, ii. 266 (N.
  crowning Z.); Berlin 2167 (Z. and Poseidon).

Footnote 1025:

  _Él. Cér._ i. 32 and iii. 38 (= Berlin 2317); Petersburg 355 =
  Reinach, i. 14.

Footnote 1026:

  Naples 3373; _Él. Cér._ i. 76 A: cf. Reinach, i. 1, 3, 5, 37, 158;
  B.M. B 608, 610, E 523; _Él. Cér._ i. 68.

Footnote 1027:

  B.M. E 445.

Footnote 1028:

  Reinach, i. 14, 253 (Bibl. Nat. 392), 406, 511, ii. 310; Naples 1891
  = _Él. Cér._ ii. 35; _ibid._ ii. 48.

Footnote 1029:

  B.M. E 432.

Footnote 1030:

  Reinach, ii. 290.

Footnote 1031:

  B.M. E 262; Reinach, i. 22, 251; B.M. F 178, Athens 1346 =
  Dumont-Pottier, i. pl. 15, _Jahrbuch_, 1892, p. 69 (N. crowning H.).

Footnote 1032:

  See p. 107, note 1222.

Footnote 1033:

  _Mon. Grecs_, 1875, pls. 1–2; Petersburg 523 = Reinach, i. 467.

Footnote 1034:

  B.M. E 410.

Footnote 1035:

  Reinach, i. 286 (?), 398 (Berlin 2521).

Footnote 1036:

  B.M. F 109; Reinach, i. 7.

Footnote 1037:

  B.M. E 182; Reinach, i. 1, 3.

Footnote 1038:

  Reinach, i. 113; and cf. BM. E 788.

Footnote 1039:

  Berlin 3023 = Reinach, i. 330.

Footnote 1040:

  Overbeck, _Her. Bildw._ 18, 7.

Footnote 1041:

  Millingen, _Anc. Uned. Mon._ i. 22; Reinach, i. 358 (unwinged figure;
  may be Eris).

Footnote 1042:

  Naples 3231 = Reinach, i. 299.

Footnote 1043:

  Reinach, i. 236.

Footnote 1044:

  _Ibid._ i. 361 (crowning them); Inghirami, _Vasi Fitt._ 187.

Footnote 1045:

  Reinach, ii. 49; i. 108, 195.

Footnote 1046:

  _Ibid._ i. 390.

Footnote 1047:

  _Ibid._ i. 98.

Footnote 1048:

  B.M. F 163; Reinach, i. 197, 8, ii. 198, 287.

Footnote 1049:

  B.M. E 574 = Plate XXXVI.; B.M. E 287, E 643; Reinach, ii. 7.

Footnote 1050:

  Reinach, i. 254 (Bibl. Nat. 392), 340, Athens 1018 = Benndorf, _Gr.
  u. Sic. Vasenb._ 19, 3 (torch); B.M. E 251, E 513, Roscher, iii. 329,
  Benndorf, _op. cit._ 47, 2 (incense-burner); B.M. E 574 (lamp);
  Oxford 274, Athens 1362, Reinach, ii. 235, 310, De Witte, _Coll. à
  l’Hôtel Lambert_, pl. 4, Benndorf, _op. cit._ 47, 1 (lyre); Athens
  1362, Reinach, i. 410 (tripod); Benndorf, _op. cit._ 48, 1 (wreath).
  On Oxford 312 she plays on a lyre. On her costume and attributes
  generally see Roscher, iii. p. 330.

Footnote 1051:

  Munich 351 = Reinach, ii. 46: see above, p. 76, note 1048.

Footnote 1052:

  Petersburg 355 = Reinach, i. 14; B.M. F 109; Jatta 1050.

Footnote 1053:

  B.M. E 455–56; Reinach, i. 195, ii. 180; _ibid._ i. 403, 428;
  Roscher, iii. 330; _Cab. Pourtalès_, pl. 6.

Footnote 1054:

  Reinach, i. 492.

Footnote 1055:

  B.M. F 66 = Fig. 124; Naples 2684 = Reinach, i. 474; Reinach, ii.
  206; _Boston Mus. Report_, 1898, No. 51.

Footnote 1056:

  _J.H.S._ vii. p. 275 ff.

Footnote 1057:

  Munich 386 = Reinach, ii. 46 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 19.

Footnote 1058:

  Inghirami, _Vasi Fitt._ 361.

Footnote 1059:

  Athens 1026 = Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ 23, 2.

Footnote 1060:

  Oxford 265; B.M. E 538; _Él. Cér._ i. 100.

Footnote 1061:

  Reinach, ii. 216.

Footnote 1062:

  B.M. B 608; Berlin 2211 = _Él. Cér._ i. 96.

Footnote 1063:

  B.M. E 700; Reinach, ii. 326 = Roscher, iii. 326 (here she is putting
  on the inscription).

Footnote 1064:

  B.M. F 550.

Footnote 1065:

  Berlin 2661 = Rayet and Collignon, p. 257.

Footnote 1066:

  Reinach, ii. 4; Millin-Reinach, i. 24; Jatta 1050.

Footnote 1067:

  B.M. E 264, 275, 476, 576.

Footnote 1068:

  B.M. E 379.

Footnote 1069:

  B.M. E 128; Reinach, i. 268.

Footnote 1070:

  B.M. F 170; Reinach, i. 45, 378, 2, ii. 187, 230, 292.

Footnote 1071:

  Reinach, ii. 262 (Bibl. Nat. 364), 291; and see 298.

Footnote 1072:

  Millin-Reinach, ii. 72.

Footnote 1073:

  B.M. B 607; Stackelberg, pl. 25 (Hegias); Oxford 288 (_Cat._ pl. 15);
  Louvre F 109 (? Agon).

Footnote 1074:

  Reinach, ii. 320; _Tyszkiewicz Coll._ pl. 35 (now in B.M.);
  Inghirami, _Vasi Fitt._ 363.

Footnote 1075:

  Reinach, i. 322.

Footnote 1076:

  B.M. E 460, 469; Reinach, i. 49, 378, ii. 274.

Footnote 1077:

  Vol. I. p. 223.

Footnote 1078:

  Reinach, i. 63.

Footnote 1079:

  B.M. B 1 (?); Petersburg 183 = Micali, _Storia_, pl. 87; Reinach, ii.
  126 (?); Daremberg and Saglio, _Dict. s.v._ Agon, fig. 180; Louvre F
  109: see also _Burlington Fine Arts Club Cat._ (1903), pp. 92, 97.

Footnote 1080:

  B.M. F 20; Berlin 3023; Millingen-Reinach, 36; Helbig, 90 = _Mus.
  Greg._ ii. 60, 3; and see Knapp, _Nike_, p. 37.

Footnote 1081:

  See above, p. 49.

Footnote 1082:

  See p. 43.

Footnote 1083:

  _Jahreshefte_, 1899, p. 16 = Reinach, i. 279; but more probably the
  scene refers to Orestes and Pylades in Tauris.

Footnote 1084:

  Vienna 319 = Reinach, i. 353: for Dike in under-world see p. 69.

Footnote 1085:

  Naples 3253 = Reinach, i. 194.

Footnote 1086:

  Naples 3233 = Reinach, i. 239.

Footnote 1087:

  Berlin 1732 = Reinach, ii. 66; B.M. B 364, B 365: see Reinach, i. 223.

Footnote 1088:

  See Roscher, iii. p. 2934.

Footnote 1089:

  Louvre E 723: see _Ath. Mitth._ 1902, p. 255.

Footnote 1090:

  Reinach, ii. 26, 4 (in Louvre).

Footnote 1091:

  B.M. B 334; Berlin 1775; Karlsruhe 259; Petersburg 1807 = Reinach, i.
  7 (at Judgment of Paris); Reinach, i. 100 (with Pelops), ii. 26, 1,
  161; Baumeister, i. p. 18, fig. 20.

Footnote 1092:

  For unidentified winged deities see Louvre F 54 = _Wiener Vorl._
  1888, pl. 5, fig. 2 (Exekias); _Wiener Vorl._ 1890–91, pl. 3, fig. 2
  (Nikosthenes).

Footnote 1093:

  Naples 3222 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1927, fig. 2042 A: see p. 69.

Footnote 1094:

  Reinach, ii. 100 (now in B.M.: see _Class. Review_, 1899, p. 468).

Footnote 1095:

  Naples 3237 = Baumeister, ii. p. 834, fig. 918 (?): see below, p. 91,
  note 1098, for other interpretations.

Footnote 1096:

  Millingen-Reinach, 23.

Footnote 1097:

  Reinach, i. 173.

Footnote 1098:

  _Ibid._ i. 229 (in Boston); B.M. F 279; B.M. F 271 and Naples 3237 =
  Baumeister, ii. p. 834, fig. 918: cf. Reinach, i. 331, 1. The name of
  Typhlosis (Blindness) has also been suggested for the figure on the
  Naples vase.

Footnote 1099:

  Vol. I. p. 480 (Assteas vase in Madrid).

Footnote 1100:

  Munich 810 = Reinach, i. 363.

Footnote 1101:

  See above, p. 65, for instances.

Footnote 1102:

  B.M. E 492; Naples 2419; Karlsruhe 208.

Footnote 1103:

  Berlin 2471.

Footnote 1104:

  B.M. B 210: see p. 58, note 701.

Footnote 1105:

  B.M. E 224.

Footnote 1106:

  Naples 2873 (Assteas).

Footnote 1107:

  B.M. E 455.

Footnote 1108:

  Munich 378.

Footnote 1109:

  Naples 3255 = Reinach, i. 235.

Footnote 1110:

  Berlin 2658 = Reinach, i. 375.

Footnote 1111:

  B.M. F 111.




                              CHAPTER XIV
                            _HEROIC LEGENDS_

    Kastor and Polydeukes—Herakles and his twelve labours—Other
      contests—Relations with deities—Apotheosis—Theseus and his
      labours—Later scenes of his life—Perseus—Pelops and
      Bellerophon—Jason and the Argonauts—Theban legends—The Trojan
      cycle—Peleus and Thetis—The Judgment of Paris—Stories of Telephos
      and Troilos—Scenes from the Iliad—The death of Achilles and the
      Fall of Troy—The Odyssey—The Oresteia—Attic and other
      legends—Orpheus and the Amazons—Monsters—Historical and literary
      subjects.


In treating of the subject of heroic legends, we propose to deal first
with the more prominent heroes, such as Kastor and Polydeukes,
Herakles, Theseus, and Perseus, and with the tales of Thebes and Troy;
next with the series of myths connected specially with Attica or other
localities; then with semi-mythical personages, such as Orpheus and
Thamyris, which lead us on to the next division of the subject—scenes
connected with Greek history.

                  *       *       *       *       *

=Kastor and Polydeukes= do not play a very extensive part on vases; and
as they are not further characterised than by the petasos and two
spears, which are the ordinary equipment of young horsemen, they are
not always to be identified with certainty, except in mythological
scenes. Among these they appear in the Gigantomachia,[1112] or in
company with Herakles are initiated into the lesser mysteries at
Agra[1113]; they are also seen at the apotheosis of Herakles.[1114]
They are present when Leda discovers the egg laid by Nemesis,[1115] and
on two B.F. vases appear with Leda and Tyndareus in a family
group[1116]; they are also seen in company with Hermes,[1117] with
Paris and Helen,[1118] with Danaos taking refuge in Attica,[1119] in a
scene from the _Merope_ of Euripides,[1120] and at the slaying of the
Sphinx by Oedipus.[1121] They take part in the hunt of the Calydonian
boar,[1122] and in many scenes from the Argonautika, such as the death
of Talos,[1123] the punishment of Amykos,[1124] and others of doubtful
meaning.[1125] There is more than one representation of their carrying
off the Leukippidae,[1126] the best being the beautiful Meidias vase in
the British Museum (Plate XLI.), where all the figures are named.[1127]
They appear as hunters,[1128] as deified beings present at a Theoxenia
(_lectisternium_), or feast of the gods,[1129] and are crowned by Nike
(with stars over their heads).[1130]

                                HERAKLES

Of all the heroic legends the most numerous and the most important are
those of the Herakleid. They appear on vases of all periods, though in
the largest proportion on the black-figured varieties, and include
every event in his life, from his birth to his deified life in Olympos.
Of the visit of Zeus to his mother Alkmena we have already spoken, as
also of her apotheosis.[1131] As an infant we see Herakles engaged in
strangling

the serpents sent by Hera, while his brother Iphikles recoils in
terror[1132]; later on Hera appears to be reconciled to his existence,
for she is actually seen suckling him at her breast.[1133] Next he is
carried off by Hermes to Cheiron the Centaur for his education,[1134]
and we see him undergoing instruction on the lyre from Linos,[1135] or
on his way, accompanied by an old woman carrying his lyre.[1136] By the
time when his series of labours begins he is usually represented as a
full-grown bearded man, especially on the archaic vases; but he appears
in a few instances as a quite youthful beardless figure.

Of all the achievements of Herakles the most famous are the Twelve
Labours, to which he was subjected by Hera at the hands of Eurystheus.
We find them all represented on vases, with the exception of the
cleansing of the Augean stables, which may be presumed to have offered
too many difficulties to the painter; it only occurs once in the whole
history of Greek art, on a metope at Olympia. The horses of Diomede
only occur once, the Keryneian stag thrice, and the Stymphalian birds
five times; but the rest may be described as common. In all these
scenes Herakles is usually accompanied by Athena; also, but less
frequently, by Iolaos and Hermes.

                  *       *       *       *       *

I. _The Nemean Lion._

Of this subject we find two “normal” types on B.F. vases,[1137] with
one or two abnormal versions; on R.F. vases the treatment is less
stereotyped.

  B.F. (1) Standing type:—Herakles plunges sword into lion’s neck (both
          upright): B.M. B 160, B 232, B 621 (Plate XXX.). H. strangles
          lion: Berlin 1720 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1888, 6, 3 (Exekias);
          _Wiener Vorl._ 1889, 6, 3 (Charitaios).

      (2) Crouching type:—Herakles stoops and strangles lion: B.M. B
          159, B 199, B 318 (Fig. 125); Petersburg 68 = _Wiener Vorl._
          1889, 4, 6 (Taleides).

      (3) Abnormal:—Lion on its back; Herakles slays it with club:
          Reinach, ii. 52. Herakles pursues lion: Louvre F 108 =
          _Wiener Vorl._ 1890–91, pl. 1, 5 (Nikosthenes).

  R.F. (1) Herakles with lion over shoulder about to hurl it on
          Eurystheus (type borrowed from Erymanthian Boar, see below):
          B.M. B 193 = Plate XXXII. (Andokides).

      (2) Crouching type: Munich 415 = Reinach, i. 150 = Baumeister, i.
          p. 656, fig. 723; B.M. E 168; _Röm. Mitth._ v. (1890), pl. 12
          = _Wiener Vorl._ 1890–91, 7, 2 (Nikosthenes, in Boston). See
          also B.M. E 104 (abnormal).

[Illustration: FIG. 125. HERAKLES AND THE NEMEAN LION (BRITISH MUSEUM).]

We may also note here a curious B.F. vase, on which Herakles is seen in
the forests of Nemea preparing the lion’s skin for his own wear.[1138]

II. _The Cretan Bull._

      Type: Herakles seizes the bull from the front and ties its legs
          with a cord.

        B.F. B.M. B 309; Berlin 1886, 1898; Helbig, 31; Reinach, ii.
          55, 5 = Baumeister, i. p. 660, fig. 727.

        R.F. B.M. E 104; _Wiener Vorl._ 1890–91, pl. 7, 2 (Nikosthenes,
          in Boston) = _Röm. Mitth._ v. (1890), p. 324.

        Late. Berlin 3145 = Millingen-Reinach, 11; Athens 1931.

          See also a very remarkable vase in _Forman Sale Cat._ No. 305
          (now at Boston), where the same subject appears each side,
          one B.F., the other R.F. (by Andokides).[1139]

III. _The Erymanthian Boar_ (see Klein, _Euphronios_, p. 87).

  (1) The capture:

        B.M. B 462; Louvre F 236; Berlin 1981, 2034; Naples 2705 and
          S.A. 150; Athens 858, 860 (all B.F.).

  (2) The bringing back of the boar (Eurystheus absent; Athena usually
          receives the hero):

        B.M. B 447, 492; Cambridge 57; Munich 694; Athens 1097 (all
          B.F.).

[Illustration: FIG. 126. HERAKLES BRINGING THE BOAR TO EURYSTHEUS
(BRITISH MUSEUM).]

        (3) Herakles hurls the boar upon Eurystheus, who hides himself
          in a large sunk jar (p????):

        B.F. B.M. B 161 (Fig. 126); Reinach, ii. 55, 1; Helbig, 37;
          Louvre F 59, 202.

        R.F. B.M. E 44 (Euphronios) = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl.
          23; Louvre G 17 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1890, pl. 10.

IV. _The Keryneian Stag._

  B.F. B.M. B 169, B 231.

  R.F. Reinach, i. 233.

A dispute between Apollo and Herakles over a stag (Rein. ii. 56, 3: see
p. 34) may perhaps be referred to this subject, as the myth is not
otherwise known, but it is more usually Artemis who endeavours to
thwart Herakles’ capture.


V. _The Stymphalian Birds._

Found only on four B.F. vases (B.M. B 163; Louvre F 387; _Arch.
Anzeiger_, 1892, p. 172; and Munich 1111 = Reinach, ii. 58) and one
late example (Reinach, ii. 297). Herakles shoots the birds with bow and
arrow.


VI. _The Lernaean Hydra._

This subject, occurring only on archaic vases, has no very fixed type;
the Hydra has seven or nine heads, and the body of a serpent or of a
cuttle-fish. Iolaos sometimes assists Herakles, and in two cases the
crab sent by Hera is also visible.

  B.F. Early: Reinach, i. 389; _Jahrbuch_, 1898, pl. 12; Reinach, i.
          118 (6) = Louvre E 851.

        Later: Reinach, i. 118 (1) = Berlin 1854 (crab); _ibid._ 118
          (3); 118 (5) = Louvre F 386 = Millin-Reinach, ii. 75 (Athena
          slays crab); Reinach, ii. 53 = Baumeister, i. p. 657, fig.
          724; Berlin 1801 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1889, 7, 3: see also Athens
          792 = Heydemann, _Gr. Vasenb._ pl. 4, 1, where two successive
          scenes are given.

  R.F. Reinach, ii. 76. Hydra has cuttle-fish body and ten or eleven
          heads.


VII. _The Horses of Diomede._

Naples 2506; Reinach, ii. 297 (?).


VIII. _The Augean Stables._

Not found on vases.

IX. _The Combat with Geryon and Capture of his Cattle._

A very favourite subject on B.F. and early vases, including some of the
finest specimens. Geryon is at first winged and only three-headed, then
triple-bodied, represented as three armed warriors united,[1140] one or
two of whom generally fall wounded. Herakles attacks with bow.

        Early B.F. “Proto-Corinthian”: B.M. A 487 = _J.H.S._ v. p. 176.
          Chalcidian: B.M. B 155; Bibl. Nat. 202 = Reinach, ii. 58 and
          253 = Plate XXII.

        Late B.F. B.M. B 156, B 194; Louvre F 53 = Reinach, ii. 59 =
          Baumeister, i. p. 662, fig. 729 (Exekias); _J.H.S._ xviii. p.
          299, and Bibl. Nat. 223 (abnormal types).

        R.F. Munich 337 (Plate XXXVIII.) = Furtwaengler and Reichhold,
          22 (Euphronios); Noel des Vergers, _Étrurie_, pl. 38.

        Late. Berlin 3258; Naples 1924 = Millingen-Reinach, 27.

The driving off of the cattle by Herakles is also represented:

    B.M. E 104; Reinach, ii. 58, 5; and see Klein, _Euphronios_, p. 61.


X. _The Girdle of Hippolyta._

    B.F. B.M. B 533.

    Late. Naples 3241 = Reinach, i. 384.

Besides the scenes in which Herakles is evidently capturing the girdle,
there are many vases on which he is seen in combat with Hippolyte and
other Amazons, such as Andromache or Alkaia, assisted himself by Iolaos
or Telamon.

    B.F. B.M. B 154, B 426; Louvre E 875; Cambridge 44; _Bourguignon
      Sale Cat._ 18 (Exekias); Berlin 3988 = _Coll. Sabouroff_, i. pl.
      49.

    R.F. B.M. E 45; Reinach, i. 166; Bibl. Nat. 535 = Reinach, ii. 265;
      Bologna 322; Reinach, i. 353 = _Wiener Vorl._ vii. 4, 1 (Duris).

    Late. Jatta 423 = Reinach, i. 206.


XI. _Fetching Kerberos from Hades._

The various types and methods of representing this subject have been
collected in _J.H.S._ xviii. p. 296; as typical examples may be given:

    Early B.F. Louvre E 701 = Reinach, i. 153; Reinach, i. 389, ii. 32.

    Late B.F. _J.H.S._ xviii. p. 295 (in B.M.); Reinach, ii. 69.

    R.F. _Jahrbuch_ viii. (1893), pl. 2 (in Berlin) and p. 160 (in
      Boston).

    Late. On several of the “under-world” vases, see p. 68, Nos. 1–4,
      11.


XII. _Fetching the Golden Apples from the Garden of the Hesperides._

There are two versions of this myth. In one, which seems to be the
earlier, Atlas fetches the apples, while Herakles supports the universe
for him (see above, p. 75). The vases representing Herakles in the
Garden surrounded by the Nymphs (for whom see p. 92) are almost all of
the later period:

  B.F. Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ pl. 42, 1.

  R.F. B.M. E 224 = Furtwaengler-Reichhold, 8–9 (Plate XLI.).

  Late. B.M. F 148; Naples 2873 = Millin-Reinach, i. 3 = _Wiener Vorl._
    viii. 12, 3 (Assteas); and Naples 3255 = Reinach, i. 236 =
    Baumeister, i. p. 686, fig. 745.

  Parody. Athens 1894 = Reinach, i. 506 (?).

Besides the somewhat insignificant part that he plays in the
Gigantomachia,[1141] Herakles had several independent combats of his
own with gigantic monsters and such-like beings. Of these the most
popular subjects are Antaios and Alkyoneus. The legend of Herakles’
wrestling with the former is familiar from Pindar[1142]; on the vases
Antaios is not characterised as a giant in size or otherwise, but his
mother Gaia is generally present.[1143]

Alkyoneus, on the other hand, is represented as a being of gigantic
size, lying asleep in a cave[1144]; a small winged figure which
sometimes hovers over him has been interpreted by some as Hypnos
(Sleep), but might also be a ??? Ta??t???, or harbinger of death.[1145]
Herakles generally attacks him with club or bow and arrow, but on one
vase is depicted gouging out his eye[1146]; on another he is assisted
by Telamon with a stone.[1147] Another giant with whom we find the hero
contending is Cacus, whose oxen he carried off. This is a purely Roman
myth, and belongs rather to the legends of the Roman Hercules, but
curiously enough it finds a place on one Greek vase of Sicilian origin,
which represents Cacus in a hut with the oxen and Herakles playing a
lyre in triumph.[1148]

One of the commonest subjects connected with Herakles is his combat
with Kyknos, the son of Ares, described at length in the Hesiodic
_Scutum Herculis_. It is mostly found on B.F. vases, the usual “type”
showing the two combatants supported by Athena and Ares respectively in
their chariots, while Zeus appears in the midst to interrupt
them.[1149] One late R.F. vase seems to show the preparations for the
combat, in the presence of an Amazon, a Fury, and other
personages[1150]; another vase, the subsequent attack made on Athena by
Ares.[1151]

We find him in combat with Acheloös, the river-god, represented as a
bull with the face of a bearded man,[1152] or occasionally, by
confusion with a sea-deity, with the body and tail of a fish.[1153]
This latter form is assumed by Triton, with whom also the hero
contends,[1154] though the myth is unknown in literature. Of similar
import is his combat with Nereus, the old man of the sea (????? G????),
who appears in human form as an aged man[1155]; the “type” employed on
B.F. vases is similar to that of Peleus wrestling with Thetis (see
below, p. 120), with similar indications of the sea-god’s
transformation into animals. In one case an air of humour is imparted
to the scene, and Herakles is represented smashing the furniture in
Nereus’ house.[1156]

Another important group of subjects is concerned with Herakles’
adventures with the Centaurs, which fall under several headings.
Allusion has already been made to his early education by Cheiron, and
again we see him paying a visit of a peaceful nature to the aged
Pholos, who entertains him by opening a jar of wine.[1157] The smell
therefrom attracted the other Centaurs and led to a combat, which we
see vividly depicted on many early B.F. vases, on which it was a
favourite subject, as also on later ones.[1158] We also find him in
combat with particular Centaurs, from whom he rescues a woman carried
off by them. Thus we see Hippolyta delivered from Eurytion,[1159] and
Deianeira from Nessos[1160] or Dexamenos[1161] (the latter appears on
later vases only, and there seems to be no distinction between them in
the myth).

Other adventures in which he engages include the freeing of Prometheus
from the vulture, which he slays with his bow[1162]; the bringing back
of Alkestis from Hades[1163]; the seizure of the Kerkopes, a pair of
brigands, whom he carries off head downwards over his shoulders[1164];
and his capture by Busiris in Egypt,[1165] with his escape after
slaying the king’s negro attendants.[1166] Among rarer myths may be
mentioned the destruction of the vines of Syleus[1167]; a possible
representation of his contest in drawing water with Lepreos[1168]; and
his combat with Erginos, the king of Orchomenos, and the capture of his
heralds.[1169] A vase in Athens, on which he is depicted dragging two
Satyrs in a leash,[1170] depicts an unknown myth; as do those which
represent him contending with Geras, a personification of Old
Age,[1171] and beating a winged Ker with his club.[1172] In company
with Athena he attacks an unknown man,[1173] and he is also seen
leading a Sphinx.[1174]

Next we turn to the relations between the hero and the Olympian or
other deities, which often take the form of disputes or combats. Of
these the most famous and important is his capture of the Delphic
tripod, for which he fights with Apollo, generally in the presence of
Athena and Artemis[1175]; in one instance Herakles is seen in Athena’s
chariot, carrying the tripod off with him[1176]; other vases represent
the final reconciliation with Apollo.[1177] There is a curious
representation of a combat between Herakles and Hera (depicted as the
Roman Juno Sospita, wearing a goatskin on her head), with Athena and
Poseidon assisting on either side.[1178] Another rare and interesting
subject is that of his attack on Helios, whom he interrupts at sunrise
to prevent his journey after Geryon’s cattle from becoming known.
Herakles is shown waiting for the chariot of the sun-god as it rises
from the waves, and preparing to discharge his arrows.[1179] A later
stage of the story is illustrated by a fine R.F. vase, where he voyages
over the sea in the golden bowl given him by Helios.[1180] Lastly, he
defends Hera and Iris against the attacks of a troop of Seileni.[1181]
In other scenes where he is associated with the gods, it is in his
divine capacity after his apotheosis.

His relations with women are not so frequently depicted but we have at
least one representation of his visit to Omphale[1182]; or, again, of
his entertainment by Eurytos,[1183] the carrying off of his daughter
Iole,[1184] and the subsequent fight with Eurytos.[1185] His rescue of
Deianeira from the Centaur has already been alluded to, and there may
also be a reference to his carrying her off from her father
Oineus.[1186] Hesione is not found with him on vases, but he is seen
carrying off Auge[1187]; he is also associated with a Nymph, who may be
Nemea.[1188] On one vase he pursues, with amorous intention, a woman,
who may possibly be intended for Athena.[1189]

A remarkable vase-painting by Assteas of Paestum depicts Herakles in a
fit of madness destroying his children by hurling them on a fire, on
which he has already thrown the household furniture; his mother and
others look on, expressing various emotions.[1190] In more peaceful
mood he is seen grouped with his wife Deianeira and their son
Hyllos,[1191] or with Oineus, his father-in-law.[1192]

We now proceed to note a few subjects which do not admit of more exact
classification. Herakles is initiated into the lesser mysteries at
Agra, together with Kastor and Polydeukes,[1193] and is conducted by
Hermes to the revels of the Scythian Agathyrsi (cf. p. 179).[1194] He
is also sometimes seen carrying Hades on his back, the latter bearing a
large cornucopia[1195]; but the signification of this subject is
unknown. He accompanies the Argonauts on their wanderings,[1196] and
appears as a single figure shooting from a bow.[1197] He is often
represented performing an act of sacrifice, either as a single
figure[1198] or in groups, sacrificing a ram or other animal.[1199]
Some of these scenes, where he sacrifices to the _xoanon_ of
Chryse,[1200] a local Lemnian goddess, must refer to the story of
Philoktetes, with which he was connected. Or, again, conversely, we see
a statue of Herakles made the subject of offerings from others.[1201] A
scene from the story of Antigone (see below, p. 119) is represented as
taking place before a shrine, in which stands the deified hero
interceding with Kreon for her life.[1202] He also appears as
protecting god of Attica,[1203] and also of the palaestra, with
reference to his traditional founding of the Olympian games.[1204]
Finally, there is a series of subjects which (as in the case with most
of the preceding section) may be concerned with Herakles either before
or after his apotheosis.

Among these are the numerous vases (especially B.F.) where he is
represented as being greeted by Athena or conversing with her,[1205]
or receiving a libation from her.[1206] These may either refer to his
receiving visits of encouragement from her in the intervals between
his labours, or to his reception by her in Olympos (see below). Many
vases represent him banqueting, usually in company with Dionysos and
other deities.[1207] With Hermes and Iolaos he takes part in a
procession accompanied by music[1208]; and he is also represented
overcome with wine and forming a subject for mockery,[1209] while
Satyrs steal his weapons[1210] (this subject being probably taken
from a Satyric drama). Or he is represented bathing at a
fountain[1211]; and in one case fishing with Hermes and
Poseidon.[1212] He also takes part in the Gigantomachia,[1213] and is
present at the birth of Athena,[1214] in both cases by a curious
anticipation of his deified character. Exceedingly common are his
appearances with a lyre, as Kitharoidos.[1215]

The last scenes of Herakles’ earthly life are his last sacrifice on
Mount Kenaion,[1216] the wearing of the poisoned robe which led to his
death,[1217] and the subsequent burning of his body on the funeral
pyre. The last scene is occasionally combined with his apotheosis; the
Hyades quench the flames among which his body is consuming, while the
deified hero ascends in the chariot of Athena or Nike to Olympos.[1218]

The vases relating exclusively to his apotheosis fall into two main
classes, which admit of more than one sub-division: (1) his ascent into
heaven in the chariot of Athena or Nike; (2) his reception in Olympos.
The ascent in the chariot of Athena is almost confined to B.F. vases;
on those of the R.F. period it rarely occurs; and on the Italian vases
her place is usually taken by Nike, who is also represented crowning
him with a wreath. On the B.F. vases the “type” is almost invariable
(see Plate XXIX.): Herakles mounts the four-horse chariot in which the
goddess stands ready; on the farther side of it stand various deities,
the commonest being Apollo, Dionysos, and Hebe, with Hermes at the
horses’ heads; more rarely Zeus, Hera, and Artemis are seen.[1219] In
one or two cases Iolaos acts as charioteer, Athena standing at the
side[1220]; or, again, Hebe performs the same office.[1221] On the late
red-figured vases the attendant deities are almost limited to Hermes
and Eros; the chariot is here usually represented as on its way.[1222]

[Illustration:

  From _Arch. Zeit._
  FIG. 127. RECEPTION OF THE DEIFIED HERAKLES BY ZEUS, FROM A VASE AT
    PALERMO.
]

The first stage of the hero’s introduction into Olympos is his
introduction to Zeus by Athena, a scene common on both B.F. and R.F.
vases (Fig. 127). The attendant deities vary very greatly: Hermes,
Apollo, Hebe, and Artemis are most often seen; also Hera, Poseidon,
Ares, and Dionysos.[1223] Besides these there are numerous scenes in
which he is grouped with various deities, usually Athena and Hermes,
but also Poseidon, Ares, Dionysos, and Hebe, apparently in the
enjoyment of his new life among the welcoming gods[1224]; and to this
group may be added the scenes in which he is crowned by Nike.[1225] The
completion of his bliss is the marriage with Hebe, found on two or
three fine R.F. vases,[1226] with a numerous company of attendant
deities.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The adventures of =Theseus=, the peculiarly Attic hero, are portrayed
on vases of all dates; they are rare on the later kinds, but are most
popular on the R.F. vases of the “strong” and “fine” periods, as would
naturally be expected at a time when his cult was coming into special
prominence in Athens (see Vol. I. p. 418). Of his seven labours the
only one commonly found on the B.F. vases is the combat with the
Minotaur, but some of the finest R.F. kylikes give a complete series.
They are given in the order of his progress from his birthplace Troezen
through the Isthmus to Athens. It should be noted that the Cretan
legends, which alone are common on the early vases, are clearly older
than the more purely Attic.

The first subject to be mentioned in connection with the story of
Theseus is that of his father Aigeus consulting the oracle of
Themis.[1227] His finding of Aigeus’ sword and sandals beneath the
stone (cf. Plate LXII.) is not depicted on vases, but we have a
possible representation of his recognition by Aigeus,[1228] and an
unintelligible scene where he pursues or attacks his mother Aithra,
apparently wielding the newly found sword.[1229]

There are only two R.F. kylikes which give the complete series of
adventures, including that in Crete; the Duris kylix in the British
Museum (Vol. I., frontisp.) omits two (the bull and Prokrustes), and
others give a varying number of scenes, omitting sometimes one,
sometimes another. The adventure with Periphetes appears to be confined
to literature. We give the list as follows, with the vases on which
they may be seen[1230]:

(1) The pine-bender Sinis.

   B.F.: Athens 879. R.F.: Reinach, i. 313 (= Naples R.C. 180) and ii.
      280.

(2) The sow of Krommyon, sometimes accompanied by a Nymph or old woman,
the personification of the locality.

   Reinach, i. 459; Noel des Vergers, _Étrurie_, pl. 14.

(3) The brigand Skiron (in Megara); this scene is usually to be
identified by the foot-pan and the tortoise.

   Reinach, i. 119.

(4) The wrestling with Kerkyon (at Eleusis).

   Reinach, i. 324.

(5) Prokrustes and his bed (near Athens).

   B.F.: Athens 879. R.F.: B.M. E 441–42; Athens 1166 = _J.H.S._ 1889,
      pl. 1; Millingen-Reinach, 9–10.

(6) The Marathonian bull.

   B.F.: Bibl. Nat. 174. R.F.: B.M. E 442; Naples 2865 = Inghirami,
      _Vasi Fitt._ 54; Millin-Reinach, i. 43: Noel des Vergers,
      _Étrurie_, pl. 35 (in Brussels).

(7) The slaying of the Minotaur.

   A very early representation (about 610 B.C.) on the Polledrara
      hydria in the British Museum (_J.H.S._ xiv. pl. 7: see Chapter
      XVIII.).

   B.F.: B.M. B 148, B 205; Munich 333 = Reinach, ii. 119 = _Wiener
      Vorl._ 1889, 2, 2, and 1155 = _Wiener Vorl._ iii. 7, 2; Berlin
      1698 = _Wiener Vorl._ iii. 7, 1; Millin-Reinach, ii. 61
      (Taleides).

   R.F.: B.M. E 441; Helbig, 80 = Reinach, ii. 81 = Baumeister, iii. p.
      1790, fig. 1874.

The complete set of seven is to be found on the following:

   B.M. E 84, where the scenes are duplicated on the exterior and
      interior of the kylix; here the Minotaur forms the central scene
      of the interior.

   _Ant. Denkm._ ii. 1 (kylix by Aeson).

The following are more or less complete:

   B.M. E 48 = Frontispiece, Vol. I. (by Duris; five scenes).

   Louvre G 104 (Euphronios).

   Reinach, i. 528–32.

After the labours on his journey comes the purification of Theseus on
reaching Athens.[1231] To this time may perhaps be referred a scene in
which he receives a palm-branch from Athena.[1232] There is a subject
which cannot be placed in literary tradition, but probably comes in
point of time immediately before or after the labours; this is the
visit to Poseidon and Amphitrite under the sea, whither he is borne by
Triton. It occurs on the beautiful Euphronios kylix in the Louvre (G
104) and elsewhere.[1233]

Next in point of time we have to deal with the story of Theseus’ voyage
to Crete and his marriage with and desertion of Ariadne. It begins with
a scene in which he bids farewell to Aigeus[1234]; then on his arrival
in Crete he slays the Minotaur, as already described. We next see the
meeting with Ariadne,[1235] followed by the nuptial ceremonies; the
latter scene, together with the subsequent arrival at Delos, and a
dance of boys and maidens liberated by Theseus, is vividly depicted on
the François vase. His desertion of the sleeping Ariadne in Naxos and
the appearance of Dionysos as her consoler form the subjects of two
very beautiful R.F. vases[1236]; but the return to Athens and the death
of Aigeus are not depicted.

The reign of Theseus at Athens is signalised by his combats with the
Amazons and Centaurs. In the former story he carries off their leader
Hippolyta as his queen, assisted by his friend Peirithoös[1237]; and in
another version it is Antiope whom he overcomes,[1238] or the subject
is treated in a more general fashion.[1239] This scene is supposed to
take place in Attica; but the story of the Centaurs belongs to
Thessaly, the home of Peirithoös. The Centaurs are represented
interrupting a banquet, throwing everything into confusion, and
carrying off Laodameia and other female victims. It occurs on the
François vase, and is treated in a vivid pictorial fashion on several
vases of a later period.[1240] The episode of the death of Kaineus (see
p. 145) belongs to this group of subjects. To the same period belongs a
vase representing the rape of a girl named Korone by Theseus and his
friend.[1241] In the story as told by Plutarch (_Thes._ 31) it was
Helene[1242] whom Theseus carried off; curiously enough, a figure thus
inscribed is also present on this vase,[1243] as well as Antiope (see
above). The rape (as described by Plutarch) was followed by their
descent into Hades to seize Persephone. For this they were doomed to
punishment, to sit for ever with hands bound behind them[1244]; but in
one version Theseus is allowed to depart after a time, as is seen on
one of the Apulian under-world vases.[1245] A vase signed by Xenotimos
represents Peirithoös seated in a chair holding two spears[1246]; but
its mythological significance is open to question.

Closely linked with the story of Theseus is that of the love of Phaidra
for Hippolytos and the death of the latter, confined to late Italian
vases; but Phaidra has not been certainly identified in any case.[1247]
There is, however, an undoubted representation of the appearance of the
bull which overthrew Hippolytos’ chariot.[1248]

                  *       *       *       *       *

Next in importance as a hero of Greek legend comes =Perseus=, born from
the golden shower in which Zeus visited Danae (see p. 19). We find
representations of the scene so touchingly sung of by Simonides, the
placing of Danae and her child in the wooden chest and sending them
adrift[1249]; and next we find Perseus as a full-grown youth, about to
set forth on his mission of slaying the Gorgon, and receiving from the
Naiads the cap, sandals, and wallet, which were to aid him in his
quest.[1250] On later vases he receives from Athena the sickle
(_harpe_) with which he slays the monster.[1251] On his way he seizes
the eye and tooth of the Graiae, a subject rarely depicted in
art.[1252] The actual slaying of the Gorgon[1253] is not so often
represented as the subsequent flight of Perseus, generally accompanied
by Athena and Hermes[1254]; in one or two instances we see Perseus
approaching his victim unobserved.[1255] Other vases depict the
headless corpse of Medusa, from which springs the young Chrysaor or
Pegasos, and the other two Gorgons, Stheno and Euryale, either pursuing
Perseus or remaining with the corpse[1256]; in one instance they appeal
to Poseidon for help.[1257]

We next see Perseus arriving at the court of Kepheus to deliver
Andromeda[1258]; she is generally represented chained to a column in
the palace itself. On other vases he is depicted in the act of slaying
the monster, but this is a somewhat rare subject.[1259] Finally, we
have the return to Seriphos and the petrifaction of the king Polydektes
by showing him the Gorgon’s head.[1260] Perseus is also represented
showing the head to Satyrs,[1261] or placing it in the wallet
(??ß?s??),[1262] or in combat with Maenads[1263]; or, again, he is
accompanied by Athena, who holds the Gorgon’s head while he looks at
the reflection.[1264] Lastly, on some small R.F. vases, a bust of
Perseus is depicted wearing his winged cap.[1265]

                  *       *       *       *       *

The story of =Pelops= is chiefly connected with Olympia, and his visit
to Oinomaos; but the subjects are almost exclusively confined to the
later Apulian vases. On one B.F. (Cyrenaic) kylix Pelops is depicted
with the winged horses given him by Poseidon,[1266] but this is
exceptional. The Olympia scenes include five episodes: (1) the arrival
of Pelops at Olympia[1267]; (2) the sacrifice or compact with
Oinomaos[1268]; (3) the race[1269]; (4) the death of Myrtilos[1270];
(5) the carrying off of Hippodameia.[1271] Pelops also occurs with
Myrtilos and Hippodameia in the under-world.[1272]

                  *       *       *       *       *

The adventures of =Bellerophon= are not so popular as those of other
heroes, especially in the R.F. period. The story told in the sixth
_Iliad_ appears in several scenes, beginning with Bellerophon’s taking
leave of Proitos[1273]; next we see him delivering the letter with its
s?µata ????? to Iobates, the king of Lycia,[1274] and then, mounted on
Pegasos, slaying the Chimaera.[1275] Subsequent events represented on
vases are the death of the perfidious Stheneboia, who falls from the
back of Pegasos,[1276] and the marriage of Bellerophon with
Philonoë.[1277]

                  *       *       *       *       *

Nor need the story of =Meleager= detain us long. Scenes from his life
are practically confined to the Calydonian boar-hunt, a subject popular
at all periods, especially on early vases.[1278] Kastor and Polydeukes,
Peleus, and other heroes, together with Atalante, are represented as
taking part, as well as Meleager. There is also a vase on which
Meleager is represented with the boar’s hide, accompanied by Atalante,
Peitho, and Eros.[1279] Other scenes where a boar-hunt is represented,
but no names given, or only names of a fanciful kind, may or may not be
identified in this way.[1280] There is one vase which appears to
represent the death of Meleager.[1281]

                  *       *       *       *       *

The next of the Greek heroes with whom we have to deal is =Jason=, with
whom we must include the whole cycle of subjects relating to the
Argonautika—such as the stories of Helle, Phineus, and Talos. The
legend of the golden fleece which gave rise to the famous quest of
Jason is first illustrated by scenes representing Helle or Phrixos in
flight on the ram,[1282] or the former grouped with her mother Nephele
and her brother Phrixos,[1283] who accompanied her on her flight. The
pursuit of Phrixos and the ram by Ino is also represented.[1284]
Lastly, there is a vase which may represent the setting out of
Jason.[1285]

In the earlier history of the Argonautic expedition the most
interesting subject found on the vases is the story of Phineus, who had
been blinded for impiety by Boreas,[1286] and was subsequently deprived
of his food by the Harpies until he was delivered by the sons of
Boreas, Zetes, and Kalais.[1287] Another event is the chastisement of
Amykos by Kastor and Polydeukes,[1288] and a fine vase of “Polygnotan”
style in the Louvre represents a group of Argonauts apparently without
any special signification.[1289] In all these scenes Kastor and
Polydeukes and the Boreades are present together with Jason. There is
also a scene which has been interpreted as belonging to the
Argonautika: Herakles is represented sacrificing to a statue of Chryse
on the island of Lemnos.[1290]

Then we have the arrival of Jason and his companions in Kolchis,[1291]
and the subsequent feats performed by the hero—his slaying the
dragon[1292] (in one version he enters into its mouth[1293]), his
contest with the bull,[1294] and finally the capture of the
fleece,[1295] which he is also represented as bringing to Pelias on his
return.[1296] The only important event relating to the homeward journey
is the death of Talos.[1297]

Among the events of his later life are the boiling of the ram by
Medeia,[1298] and the subsequent destruction of the aged Pelias[1299];
the renewal of Jason’s own youth[1300]; the death of his wife Glauke by
Medeia’s agency[1301]; and the latter’s slaughter of her
children,[1302] with her pursuit by Jason.[1303] Medeia also appears in
another connection at Theseus’ leave-taking of his father Aigeus,[1304]
and among the Athenian tribal heroes on the vase by Meidias.[1305]
Though not necessarily connected with Jason, the funeral games held
after the death of Pelias[1306] must also find mention here. Scenes
therefrom are represented on more than one vase—such as the
chariot-race conducted by Kastor and others in the presence of three
judges (Pheres, Akastos, and Argeos), and the wrestling of Peleus and
Hippalkimos.[1307] On another Zetes is victorious over Kalais in the
foot-race.[1308]

                           THE THEBAN LEGEND

The “tale of Thebes” falls into various episodes, more or less
connected, especially those which relate to the story of Oedipus and
his line.[1309] Conspicuous as founder of the city is the Phoenician
_Kadmos_, whose encounter with the dragon is depicted on vases of
various periods. On some he receives from Athena the stone with which
he is to slay the monster[1310]; on others he is seen approaching the
fountain of Ares, where he was to meet it[1311]; and, lastly, we have
the actual slaying of the dragon,[1312] sometimes in the presence of
Harmonia and various deities and personified figures, including Thebes.
After the slaying of the dragon Kadmos sacrifices to Athena Onka.[1313]
The completion of the story is seen in his marriage with
Harmonia.[1314] A rarer subject is the punishment of Dirke by her
brothers Amphion and Zethos, who tied her to a wild bull[1315]; while a
later episode of the story is the pursuit of her sister Antiope by her
lover Phokos.[1316]

The story of the Oidipodia is introduced by the subject of Laios (the
father) carrying off the young Chrysippos.[1317] Then we have the
exposure of the infant Oedipus and his discovery by the shepherd
Euphorbos.[1318] Of later events in the life of _Oedipus_, the only one
that attained to any popularity is the slaying of the Sphinx. The
actual deed only occurs once,[1319] and the usual “type” is that of
Oedipus (usually a young man) standing before the Sphinx, which is
seated on a rock or column.[1320] It is not always to be identified
with certainty.[1321] In one instance Oedipus is represented with
Teiresias[1322]; in another with persons named Sikon and Kalliope—a
subject hitherto unexplained.[1323] We need only make passing reference
here to a vase supposed to represent the tomb of Oedipus, inscribed
with a couplet of verses, at which stand two youths.[1324]

Before continuing the story of the house of Oedipus, we must digress to
that of _Amphiaraos_, the warrior-seer, whose departure from his wife
Eriphyle to the Theban War is a favourite subject on vases.[1325] It
becomes, in fact, a “type” adopted in ordinary scenes.[1326] We also
find on the reverse of one of the vases with this subject the departure
of another warrior, perhaps intended for the hero’s son Alkmaion, or
for Adrastos.[1327] On an early vase Amphiaraos is seen bringing home
Eriphyle in his chariot. The names of his horses, Thoas and Dion, are
given.[1328] A curious subject is that of the hero in the bosom of his
family, with his wife Eriphyle suckling her son Alkmaion, and a maiden
spinning.[1329] His death is represented on one B.F. vase[1330]; on
another his slaying of Eriphyle.[1331] Another event is the death of
the child Archemoros, caused by a serpent.[1332] A fine late vase in
Naples depicts the _prothesis_ or laying out of his body by his mother
Eurydike and others.[1333] The subsequent fight of Tydeus and
Lykourgos, interrupted by Adrastos, also occurs,[1334] and the
reception of the fugitive Tydeus by Adrastos.[1335] Tydeus appears once
more as the slayer of Ismene[1336]; but according to another version
she and her sister Antigone are attacked by Laodamas when the Epigoni
return to Thebes many years later.[1337] We can only point to one
possible representation of the combat of Eteokles and Polyneikes on
vases,[1338] though it is common enough, _e.g._ in Etruscan art; but
there is at least one representation of Antigone being brought before
Kreon after the burial of her brother,[1339] which also forms a
burlesque subject on the comic stage.[1340]

                            THE TROJAN CYCLE

We now come to the story of the Trojan War, linked with which are the
events which led up to it and those which immediately followed upon
it—such as the Judgment of Paris on the one hand, and the stories of
Odysseus and Orestes on the other. These events are so numerous that
they require careful classification. They may be divided into three
main sections: (1) Ante-Homerica, including the events that led to the
war and those that took place during the first nine years of it; (2)
Homerica, or the events of the _Iliad_; (3) Post-Homerica, or the
stories of the death of Achilles, the fall of Troy, the _Odyssey_ and
other ??st??, and the Oresteia. The literary authorities for these
events, on the lines of which our classification follows, are discussed
elsewhere (p. 4 ff.).

In spite of the warning of Horace that in writing of the story of Troy
it is not necessary to begin _ab ovo_, it is impossible here to avoid
reference to the earliest event which bears at all on the
subject—namely, the birth of Helen from the egg, which was the result
of Zeus’ _amour_ with Nemesis. The subject is referred to on several
vases, the moment chosen being that when the egg is found by
Leda.[1341] Her husband Tyndareus and her other offspring,
Klytaemnestra and the Twin Brethren, are usually present. There is one
undoubted instance of the nuptials of Helen and Menelaos.[1342]

The first event, however, which can be regarded as having a direct
effect on the outbreak of the war is the marriage of Peleus and Thetis,
at which the apple of discord was flung by Eris among the goddesses,
and which brought about the birth of the hero of the war, Achilles. In
ancient art, especially on vases,[1343] Peleus is depicted forcibly
capturing Thetis from the company of her sister Nereids, while she
tries to elude him by assuming various shapes, all conventionally
indicated in the vase-paintings. Some vases represent the approach of
Peleus and his pursuit of Thetis,[1344] the majority the actual
struggle (Fig. 128),[1345] and one or two the announcement of the issue
to Nereus and the company of Nereids (who are named).[1346]

The next stage is the introduction of Thetis to the Centaur Cheiron by
Peleus.[1347] Then we have the celebration of their nuptials, with the
assembling of the gods, as described by Catullus, and vividly, if
quaintly, depicted on the François vase,[1348] followed in due course
by Peleus bringing the young Achilles to be educated by Cheiron,[1349]
and his subsequent sojourn in Skyros.[1350] There is one possible
representation of the seething of Achilles in the caldron to secure his
immortality.[1351]

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: FIG. 128. PELEUS SEIZING THETIS (BRITISH MUSEUM).]

The next event is the =Judgment of Paris=, perhaps of all the scenes
from the story of the Trojan War the most popular with the
vase-painters of all periods. The story of the forsaken Oenone, in the
telling of which Tennyson has familiarised us with the scene of the
Judgment, did not appeal to the unromantic Greeks in the same way. We
only find one vase on which she is possibly represented.[1352]
Curiously enough, the vase-paintings seldom show the central act of the
story—the award of the golden apple. In fact, in the earlier examples
Paris is omitted altogether, and we only see the three goddesses led in
procession by Hermes. One vase, again, represents the preparations of
the goddesses for the trial, Athena washing at a fountain and Aphrodite
performing her toilet with the assistance of Eros.[1353] The rest may
be classified as follows (the order adopted showing a rough
chronological development of the type[1354]):

[Illustration:

  From _Wiener Vorlegeblätter_
  FIG. 129. THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS (CUP BY HIERON IN BERLIN).
]

    (1) Hermes leads the three goddesses, Athena alone being
      characterised; Paris absent. Only on B.F. vases.[1355]

    (2) Procession-type preserved, but Paris is present, standing. Type
      modified on R.F. vases.[1356]

    (3) Procession-type; Paris seated; landscape introduced (see Fig.
      129).[1357]

    (4) Procession-type abandoned; goddesses picturesquely grouped,
      with attendant figures. Only on R.F. and later vases.[1358] In
      one instance two stages seem to be represented: first, the
      goddesses grouped for the Judgment, accompanied by Apollo,
      Helios, and Selene; secondly, the victorious Aphrodite crowned by
      Eros.[1359]

Parodied renderings of the subject also occur.[1360]

The reward of Paris for his judgment was, as we know, “the fairest wife
in Greece.” Accordingly we next find him arrived at Sparta and carrying
off the fair Helen as his bride. The vases (all of the R.F. and late
periods) depict him on his arrival at Menelaos’ palace introduced to
Helen,[1361] or else we see Helen at her toilet making preparations for
her new consort[1362]; next, Paris leads away Helen or carries her off
in his chariot,[1363] and finally introduces her to his father Priam on
his return home.[1364]

The war having now broken out, we are introduced to the two chief
heroes on the Greek side, Achilles and Ajax, as they bid farewell to
their family and friends and set out in full equipment. Achilles,
accompanied by Patroklos, Menoitios, and other heroes, bids farewell to
his parents Peleus and Thetis[1365]; he also pays a farewell visit to
his grandfather Nereus, who presents him with a crown,[1366] and
receives a valedictory libation from a Nereid.[1367] Again, we see
Achilles and Patroklos taking leave of Nestor, accompanied by
Antilochos.[1368] Ajax is represented taking leave of Lykos,[1369] and
also of his father Telamon[1370]; but as in one of the latter cases the
names are wrongly applied on the vase, it may only represent an
idealised departure of an ordinary warrior. There is also a vase which
represents Nestor arming (putting on a greave) in presence of
Euaichme.[1371]

We next find the warriors gathered in Aulis, waiting for the favouring
breeze, and whiling away the time (as Euripides describes[1372]) in the
game of pess?? or draughts, which is played by Ajax and Achilles (names
usually given) seated at a raised board in full armour, with the statue
of Athena behind them.[1373] There is another variety of the type, in
which the presence of Athena seems to have more meaning. Here the two
heroes cast lots with dice before the statue, and there may be some
reference to the dispute of Ajax and Odysseus for the arms of Achilles,
which was settled by Athena.[1374] The story of the sacrifice of
Iphigeneia, though popular with poets and painters, for some reason
never found its way on to the vases until the influence of great
pictures and plays was beginning to make itself felt; and then only
appears in one instance, where the transformation into a deer is
indicated.[1375] The only other incident of the voyage which concerns
us is the halt at Lemnos and the sacrifice to the local goddess Chryse,
where Philoktetes is bitten by the serpent and has to be left behind on
account of his wound.[1376] This island was also the scene of the
carrying off by Achilles of Chryseis, the daughter of Chryses, the
priest of the local goddess, of which there is one possible
representation.[1377]

Two doubtful references to opening scenes of the war are to be found in
a supposed consultation of Zeus with Themis among the Olympian
deities,[1378] and a representation of the Greeks formally demanding
back Helen,[1379] a demand which of course was not granted. The story
of Telephos also belongs to an early stage, and three incidents
therefrom are found. In one case he is represented as wounded by the
spear of Achilles[1380]; again, entering the Greek camp disguised as a
beggar, in order to apply to Agamemnon for aid[1381]; and, lastly, he
is seen seizing the infant Orestes, whom he threatens to destroy if his
request is not granted.[1382] A R.F. kylix in Boston represents in the
interior Odysseus persuading Achilles to heal Telephos’ wound; on the
exterior the wounded hero comes, not to Agamemnon’s tent, but to his
palace at Mycenae.[1383]

At a much later stage of the war comes the incident of Troilos, a
subject which attained to great popularity, especially with the B.F.
vase-painters. It falls into five distinct scenes: (1) the departure of
Troilos, with his two horses[1384]; (2) the ambuscade of Achilles
behind the fountain to which Polyxena comes to draw water[1385]; (3)
the flight of Troilos and Polyxena, and pursuit by Achilles[1386]; (4)
the death of Troilos[1387]; and (5) the fight over his body.[1388] Of
these, the ambuscade and the pursuit are the most commonly represented.

A few incidents which are not to be traced in literature probably
belong to the Ante-Homeric period. They are (1) Achilles bandaging the
wounded Patroklos, on the well-known Sosias cup[1389]; (2) the wounded
Achilles tended by Patroklos and Briseis[1390]; (3) a combat of Hector
and Achilles attended by Sarpedon and Phoinix (in one case Phoinix
interrupts)[1391]; (4) a general combat of Greeks and Trojans.[1392]

It will be most convenient to deal with the various scenes which can be
traced to the Homeric poems (or to co-ordinate traditions) in tabular
form, noting where possible the actual passages which they appear to
illustrate. But it must be borne in mind that the vase-painter was
never an illustrator; he rather looked to literature for suggestions,
which he worked out on his own lines, and consequently coincidences
with or divergencies from the Homeric text must not be too closely
insisted upon.

Book I. 187 ff. The dispute of Agamemnon and Achilles.

    Possibly to be identified in such scenes as on B.M. B 327, 397, and
      E 13; but very doubtful: see below, p. 133, and Robert, _Bild u.
      Lied_, p. 213.

      320 ff. Agamemnon and Briseis.

    Reinach, i. 148 = Baumeister, i. p. 721, fig. 776 (Hieron in
      Louvre); and see B.M. E 76. Achilles and Briseïs are found
      grouped together on two R.F. vases, but without any particular
      allusion: see B.M. E 258 and Helbig, 84 = _J.H.S._ i. pl. 6 =
      Reinach, ii. 91.

      430 ff. Chryses propitiating Apollo.

    Engelmann-Anderson, _Atlas to Iliad_, iii. 12.

Book II. 50 ff. Agamemnon in council.

    B.M. B 149.

      212 ff. Thersites insulting Agamemnon.

    B.M. E 196.

Book III. 259 ff. Priam setting out in his chariot.

    _Jahrbuch_, iv. (1889), pl. 10.

      340 ff. Combat of Menelaos and Paris.

    B.M. E 20; Duris kylix in Louvre (_Wiener Vorl._ vi. 7 =
      Engelmann-Anderson, vi. 23).

Book V. 95–296. Combat of Diomedes and Pandaros (a reminiscence of).

    Berlin 764 = _Ant. Denkm._ i. pl. 7, fig. 15; and see _Hermes_,
      1901, p. 388; actually here Diomedes and Aeneas fight over the
      body of Pandaros.

      312 ff. Combat of Diomedes and Aeneas, the latter protected by
      Aphrodite.

    B.M. E 73; Tyszkiewicz Coll. pl. 18 (very fine R.F. vase, now in
      Boston); Reinach, i. 120 = ii. 97 (B.F.).

Book VI. 215 ff. Diomedes and Glaukos exchanging arms.

    Stackelberg, pl. 11, 1.

      258 ff. (1) Hector arming.

    Munich 378 = Reinach, ii. 94 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 14.

          (2) Hector bidding farewell to Priam and Hecuba.

    Helbig, 134 = Reinach, ii. 94 = Engelmann-Anderson, iii. 38.

          (3) Hector bidding farewell to Andromache and Astyanax.[1393]

    _J.H.S._ ix. pl. 3 = B.M. E 282; Reinach, ii. 255 = Bibl. Nat. 207.

          (4) Departure of Hector.

    B.M. B 76, B 235 (?); Louvre E 638 (= Reinach, i. 243), E 642;
      Reinach, ii. 160; _Jahrbuch_, iv. (1889), p. 260.

      321 ff. Hector conducting Paris to battle.

    Bibl. Nat. 207 = Reinach, ii. 255.

Book VII. 162 ff. Combat of Ajax and Hector.

    Munich 53; Helbig, 6 = Reinach, i. 104 (see under xiv. 402 ff.);
      Baumeister, i. pl. 13, figs. 779–80; B.M. E 438 (Smikros); and
      see Duris kylix in Louvre (_Wiener Vorl._ vi. 7 =
      Engelmann-Anderson, vii. 42).

Book VIII. 89 ff. Combat of Hector and Diomedes.

    Reinach, ii. 96.

      261 ff. Teukros and Ajax son of Telamon.

    Robert, in _Hermes_, 1901, p. 390, mentions a fragment of a
      Corinthian pinax in Berlin with these two figures, which may
      either belong to the above passage, or to xii. 370 ff., or to xv.
      415 ff.

      397 ff. Iris interrupting Athena (see pp. 39, 77).

    Reinach, ii. 296.

Book IX. Achilles lying sick (apparently a _contaminatio_ or confusion
      of ix. 168 ff. and xviii. 35 ff.).[1394]

    _Jahrbuch_, vii. (1892), pl. 1.

      173 ff. Embassy of Odysseus and Phoinix to Achilles (R.F. vases
      only).

    B.M. E 56 = _Wiener Vorl._ C. 3, 3; Berlin 2176 (= Reinach, i.
      282), 2326 (= Reinach, i. 431 = Roscher, iii. 658);
      Millin-Reinach, i. 14; Reinach, i. 148 = _Wiener Vorl._ C. 6
      (Hieron) and 149.

Book X. 330–461. Episode of Dolon; his capture by Odysseus.

    Oxford 226; Munich 583 = _Jahrbuch_, v. (1890), p. 143; Bibl. Nat.
      526 = Reinach, i. 89 = _Wiener Vorl._ v. 5 (Euphronios); Reinach,
      i. 334 = Petersburg 879; B.M. F 157 = Fig. 130. Dolon as single
      figure: Reinach, i. 306 = _Wiener Vorl._ iii. 1.

      469–525. Rhesos and his horses.

    B.M. B 234–35; Naples 2910 = Baumeister, i. p. 728, fig. 782
      (Odysseus and Diomedes with the horses); _Wiener Vorl._ C. 3, 2.

      566 ff. The horses of Rhesos brought to the tent of Diomedes.

    Munich 583 = _Jahrbuch_, v. (1890), p. 146 (a slave waters the
      horses; another brings drink to Diomedes).

Book XI. The fight at the ships.

    Munich 890 = Reinach, ii. 99 = Baumeister, i. p. 729, fig. 783.

Book XIV. Combat of Ajax and Aeneas (? l. 402 ff.).

    Reinach, i. 306 = _Wiener Vorl._ iii. 1; _id._ i. 104 = Helbig, No.
      6 (? see above, under vii. 162 ff.).

[Illustration: FIG. 130. CAPTURE OF DOLON (LUCANIAN KRATER IN BRITISH
MUSEUM).]

Book XVI. 666 ff. Sarpedon carried off by Hypnos and Thanatos.

    See Louvre F 388; but this scene is hardly to be distinguished from
      those with Memnon (see below, p. 132).

Book XVII. 60 ff. Combat of Menelaos and Euphorbos, and fight over his
      body.

    B.M. A 749 = Baumeister, i. p. 730, fig. 784[1395]; and see E 20.

      123 ff. Combat over body of Patroklos.

    Exekias kylix (Munich 339 = Reinach, ii. 36); Reinach, ii. 95;
      Millin-Reinach, i. 49; Berlin 2264 (Oltos and Euxitheos) =
      _Wiener Vorl._ D. 2, 1 = Engelmann-Anderson, xiv. 76.

Book XVIII. 367 ff. (1) Thetis in the smithy of Hephaistos.

    Berlin 2294 = Overbeck, _Her. Bildw._ 18, 6.

          (2) Hephaistos polishing Achilles’ shield.

    _Röm. Mitth._ ii. (1887), p. 242.

Book XIX. 1–18. Thetis and the Nereids bringing the armour to Achilles.

    (_a_) Riding on sea-monsters over the waves (all late vases).

    B.M. F 69; Jatta 1496 = Reinach, i. 112; Roscher, iii. 221–24; and
      see Heydemann, _Nereiden mit Waffen_.

    (_b_) Presenting the weapons to Achilles.

    B.M. E 363; Millin-Reinach, i. 14.

    364 ff. Achilles arming.

    Athens 671 = _Wiener Vorl._ ii. 6; Overbeck, _Her. Bildw._ xviii.
      4, 7; vase by Amasis at Boston (_Report_ for 1901, No. 5).

Book XXI. 114 ff. Combat of Achilles and Lykaon.

    B.M. F 173.

Book XXII. 188 ff. Achilles pursuing Hector round the walls of Troy.

    Reinach, ii. 102 (now in Boston: see _Museum Report_ for 1898, No.
      42).

      209 ff. Zeus weighing the heroes’ souls in his scales.[1396]

    B.M. B 639; Bibl. Nat. 385 = Reinach, i. 89; Millin-Reinach, i. 19
      = Baumeister, ii. p. 921, fig. 994.

      306 ff. Death of Hector.

    B.M. E 468; Munich 421; Reinach, ii. 101 = Helbig, 106; _Boston
      Mus. Report_ for 1899, p. 79, No. 31 (parody). Cf. Millingen,
      _Anc. Uned. Mon._ i. 4 = Engelmann-Anderson, _Odyss._ iii. 15.

      437 ff. Andromache suckling Astyanax (_compare only_).

    B.M. E 509.

Book XXIII. 157 ff. Funeral games for Patroklos.

    François vase (chariot-race, etc.).

    175 ff. Sacrifice of Trojan captives on the pyre of Patroklos.

    Naples 3254 = Reinach, i. 187.

Book XXIV. 16 ff. Achilles dragging Hector’s body past the
                       tomb of Patroklos.

    B.M. B 543 and _Forman Sale Cat._ 306 = Reinach, ii. 100 (now in
      B.M.)[1397]; Berlin 1867 = Reinach, ii. 99; Naples 2746.

      141 ff. Achilles offering his hair to the river Spercheios.

    B.M. E 555 (?).

      448 ff. Priam begging Achilles for the body of Hector; the
      Achaean princes deliberating over the ransom.

    Munich 404 (= Overbeck, _Her. Bildw._ pl. 20, 3), and 890 (=
      Reinach, ii. 99); Petersburg 422 = Reinach, i. 138 = Baumeister,
      i. p. 739, fig. 792; Reinach, i. 172 = Vienna 328; Athens 889 =
      _Ath. Mitth._ 1898, pl. 4 (B.F., but poor).

      580 ff. Hector’s body carried out to prepare for burial.

    Petersburg 422 (as above).

Among the events of the war between the death of Hector and the final
fall of Troy, those which relate to the final exploits of Achilles are
most prominent, and especially the encounters with Memnon, and with
Penthesileia, his death and the events arising out of it. The story of
Achilles’ fight with Penthesileia, and the death of the Amazon queen,
is less frequently depicted, but there are some very fine examples
remaining.[1398] Other representations of Amazons arming, setting out,
or in combat may be placed here, but except where Penthesileia is
specially indicated it is better to regard them as having no definite
reference to the Trojan story.[1399] A remarkable painting on an
Apulian amphora depicts the slaying of Thersites by Achilles in the
presence of Phoinix and Diomedes. Thersites had insulted Achilles after
his slaying of Penthesileia.[1400]

The story of Memnon is related on the vases in several scenes,
beginning with his equipment and departure for the fray.[1401] Next we
see the great fight of Achilles and Memnon over the body of
Antilochos,[1402] at which the respective mothers of the heroes, Thetis
and Eos, are usually present as spectators.[1403] The result of the
fight was fatal to Memnon, whose body we see carried off by Thanatos
and Hypnos,[1404] or by Eos herself,[1405] for burial in his native
land. Eos is also represented mourning over him.[1406] The
Psychostasia, or weighing of souls by Zeus (see p. 130), has also been
referred to this event. The body of Antilochos is finally rescued and
carried off by Nestor.[1407]

Lastly, we find a few possible representations of the death of
Achilles,[1408] and others, more certainly to be identified, of the
battle raging round his body, in which Diomedes is wounded[1409]; also
of Ajax carrying the body off out of the battle,[1410] and the
subsequent mourning of the Nereids over it.[1411] A representation of
the ghost of a warrior, winged and fully armed, flying over a
ship,[1412] is to be regarded as that of Achilles, though to what event
it alludes is not clear. The dispute over the hero’s armour and the
suicide of the disappointed Ajax are introduced by a scene representing
the fetching of Neoptolemos, his son, from Skyros, where he bids
farewell to Lykomedes and Deidameia[1413]; of the quarrel between Ajax
and Odysseus there are also several representations.[1414] It was
decided finally by Athena, who is represented presiding over the Greek
chiefs as they vote[1415]; or, according to another version, they cast
lots before her statue.[1416] The armour is then awarded to
Neoptolemos,[1417] who, according to an oracle, was indispensable for
the capture of Troy. Ajax goes mad with disappointment, and finally
commits suicide by falling on his sword[1418]; the episode of his
slaying the sheep is not, however, represented.

The ????? ???s??, or =sack of Troy=, which is so vividly represented on
many of the vases of advanced and late style, may be said to begin with
the episode of the seizure of the Palladion by Odysseus and
Diomede.[1419] It is rapidly followed by the construction of the wooden
horse and its entry into the city.[1420] There is, however, only one
certain representation of the death of Laokoön to be traced,[1421] and
none of the traitorous Sinon.

Several vases, especially of the later epoch, collect the chief
episodes in a frieze or in a series of groups, including the rape of
Kassandra by Ajax, son of Oileus, the death of Priam and Astyanax, the
recapture of Helen by Menelaos, and the flight of Aeneas; other scenes
represented are the leading back of Aithra by Akamas and Demophon, and
the sacrifice of Polyxena and subsequent blinding of Polymestor by
Hecuba.

I. General.

  Berlin 1685 (= Overbeck, _Her. Bildw._ pl. 26, 1) and 2281; Plate
    LIV. = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 25 (Brygos in Louvre);
    Naples 2422 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 34 = Baumeister, i.
    pl. 14, fig. 795; B.M. F 160, F 278.

II. (_a_) Ajax seizing Kassandra at the altar of Athena.

  B.F. B.M. B 242, 379; Berlin 1698; Roscher, ii. p. 979.

  R.F. B.M. E 336, E 470; Reinach, i. 221, 338 = Roscher, ii. pp. 985,
    981; _Bourguignon Sale Cat._ 33.

  Late. B.M. F 209; Roscher, ii. p. 983.

(_b_) Death of Priam and Astyanax.[1422]

    (1) Priam only.

  B.M. B 241; _Röm. Mitth._ iii. (1888), pp. 108–9; Reinach, ii. 109;
    Berlin 3996. [Priam dead in all except second.]

    (2) Priam usually seated on altar; Neoptolemos swings body or head
      of Astyanax.

  B.M. B 205; Berlin 2175, 3988; Reinach, i. 221, ii. 109; _J.H.S._
    xiv. pl. 9. [See also under I.]

    (3) Andromache or Hecuba with body of Astyanax.

  Millin-Reinach, ii. 37 (Lasimos in Louvre; also identified as
    Archemoros: see p. 118).

(_c_) Menelaos and Helen.

  B.M. E 161, 263; Reinach, i. 437, 3 (Hieron), ii. 34; Helbig, 43 (=
    _Mus. Greg._ ii. 49, 2), and ii. p. 325 (= Baumeister, i. p. 746,
    fig. 798); Millingen, _Anc. Uned. Mon._ pl. 32; Louvre G 3
    (Pamphaios); Reinach, i. 222 = _Wiener Vorl._ D. 8, 1; Noel des
    Vergers, _Étrurie_, iii. pl. 39.

(_d_) Akamas and Demophon with Aithra.

  B.M. B 244 (?), E 458; Overbeck, _Her. Bildw._ pl. 26, 13.

(_e_) Flight of Aeneas with family.

  B.M. B 173, B 280; Reinach, ii. 110 (= Munich 903), 116, 273;
    Baumeister, i. p. 31, fig. 32; Helbig, 201 = _Mus. Greg._ ii. 85,
    2; Naples 2481; Bibl. Nat. 261; Louvre F 122 = _Wiener Vorl._
    1890–91, pl. 5, 1.

(_f_) Sacrifice of Polyxena.

  Plate XXIII. = _J.H.S._ xviii. pl. 15 (B.M.); Overbeck, _Her. Bildw._
    pl. 27, 19.

(_g_) Polymestor blinded.

  Reinach, i. 91 = Hill, _Illustrations of School Classics_, p. 170
    (now in B.M.).

(_h_) Ajax stabbing a captive (?).

  Reinach, i. 88.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                               PLATE LIV

[Illustration:

  From _Furtwaengler and Reichhold_.

  THE SACK OF TROY; KYLIX BY BRYGOS IN LOUVRE.
]

         ------------------------------------------------------

Among the various adventures described by the Cyclic poets in the
??st??, few seem to have found their way into the vase-paintings except
the fate of Agamemnon, the interview of Menelaos with Proteus (told in
the _Odyssey_), and, of course, the adventures of Odysseus.

The house of Atreus and its story will be dealt with later under the
heading of the Oresteia: we turn now to the =Odyssey=, scenes from
which are surprisingly few in Greek art, and appear to have attracted
the painter less than the more stirring events of the _Iliad_. The
following, however, have been identified:

Book II. 94 ff. Penelope at her loom.

    Reinach, i. 191.

Book III. 12 ff. Arrival of Telemachos at Nestor’s house in Pylos.

    Berlin 3289 = Roscher, iii. 298 = Engelmann-Anderson, iii. 13.

Book IV. 349 ff. The story of Menelaos’ interview with Proteus.

    Naples 1767 = _Mus. Borb._ xiii. 58 = Engelmann-Anderson, iv. 22.

Book V. 228 ff. Odysseus navigating the sea on a raft.

    Oxford 262, _Cat._ pl. 26 (burlesque). See also B.M. E 156
      (Odysseus and Leukothea).

Book VI. 126 ff. Nausikaa washing clothes.

    Munich 420 = Reinach, ii. 110 = Roscher, _s.v._

            Alkinoös and Nausikaa (parody).

      Reinach, i. 153.

Book IX. 345 ff. Odysseus offering wine to Polyphemos.

    _Boston Mus. Report_, 1899, p. 60.

          371 ff. Odysseus putting out the eye of Polyphemos.

    Plate XVI. = Helbig, i. p. 435, No. 641 (Aristonoös); Bibl. Nat.
      190 = Reinach, i. 64; B.M. B 154; Louvre F 342 = _Gaz. Arch._
      1887, pl. 1; Berlin 2123; _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1895, p. 35;
      _Jahrbuch_, 1891, pl. 6: see Bolte, _Monum. ad Odyss. pert._ p. 2.

          420 ff. Odysseus escaping under the ram.

    B.M. B 407, 502, 687; Karlsruhe 167 = _J.H.S._ iv. p. 249; Louvre A
      482; Reinach, i. 64: see also _Ath. Mitth._ 1897, pl. 8 (a very
      early instance); generally, _J.H.S._ iv. p. 248 ff., and _Rev.
      Arch._ xxxi. (1897), p. 28 ff.

Book X. 210 ff. Odysseus and Kirke (see _J.H.S._ xiii. p. 82).

      (_a_) Arrival of Odysseus.

    Reinach, i. 142 = Roscher, ii. 1195.

      (_b_) Transformations of comrades.

    Reinach i. 396; Berlin 2342 = _ibid._ i. 418; _Boston Mus. Report_,
      1899, pp. 59, 61 (both early B.F.).

      (_c_) Odysseus and Kirke.

    _J.H.S._ xiii. pls. 2 (Athens 956), 4 (in B.M.), p. 81 (Oxford
      262); and see Reinach, i. 142.

Book XI. 23 ff. Odysseus sacrificing before his visit to Hades.

    Bibl. Nat. 422 = Reinach, i. 126 = Baumeister, ii. p. 1040, fig.
      1254.

Book XII. 164–200. Odysseus passing the Sirens.

    Athens 958 = _J.H.S._ xiii. pl. 1; B.M. E 440; and see _J.H.S._ vi.
      pl. 49, p. 20 (= Louvre F 123); Corinthian aryballos in Boston
      (_Strena Helbigiana_, p. 31).

Scenes from the last twelve books are even rarer:

Book XVIII. 35 ff. Odysseus and Iros.

    Reinach, ii. 357.

Book XIX. 385 ff. Odysseus recognised by Eurykleia.

    Reinach, i. 191.

          394 ff. The story of Autolykos.

    In connection herewith see Munich 805 = Reinach, i. 277 for a
      possible representation of the betrothal of Laertes and Antikleia
      (_Hermes_, 1898, p. 641; Robert, _Homer_. _Becher_, p. 90 ff.;
      Hyginus, _Fab._ 201).

Book XXI. 393—XXII. 5 ff. The slaying of the suitors.

    Berlin 2588 = Reinach, i. 217.

The scenes from the =Oresteia= cover roughly the same ground as the
great trilogy of Aeschylos, together with the _Iphigeneia in Tauris_
and the _Andromache_ of Euripides. We have first the murder of
Agamemnon by Klytaemnestra with her axe.[1423] Next, Elektra making her
offerings at the tomb of Agamemnon, sometimes accompanied by her sister
Chrysothemis.[1424] It must be borne in mind that the “type” of this
scene does not differ in any respect from ordinary scenes of “offering
at a _stele_,” and therefore, where the names are not given or are
obviously modern additions, this interpretation is at best a doubtful
one. The same applies to the next series of vases, on which Orestes
meets Elektra at the tomb[1425]; but there seems to be one undoubted
instance of Orestes and Pylades with the urn containing the supposed
ashes of the former (cf. Soph. _Electra_, 1098 ff.).[1426] The next
group to be dealt with shows us Orestes slaying Aegisthos,[1427] while
Klytaemnestra is held back by Talthybios[1428]; and, finally, the death
of Klytaemnestra herself.[1429]

Orestes is then pursued by the Furies,[1430] and seeks refuge at
Delphi, where he is purified by Apollo at the Omphalos[1431]; and he is
also seen at Athens, where he afterwards sought the protection of
Athena.[1432] Other vases, nearly all of late date, and therefore under
the influence of the Euripidean tragedy, represent Orestes accompanied
by Pylades, arrived at the temple of the Tauric Artemis, where
Iphigeneia presents Pylades with the letter.[1433] Lastly, we have the
death of Neoptolemos at the hand of Orestes at Delphi.[1434]

                             ATTIC LEGENDS

It will now be necessary to deal with sundry isolated subjects, which
do not admit of being grouped together round the name of any one great
hero or any particular legend. There are, however, a certain number
which may perhaps be regarded as having a special connection with
Athens, and with these we will begin.[1435] Some of the specially
Athenian myths have already been discussed in other connections,
notably the story of Theseus (p. 108), the dispute of Athena and
Poseidon (p. 24), the sending of Triptolemos (p. 27), and the rape of
Kephalos by Eos[1436] and of Oreithyia by Boreas (p. 80). There remain
then the following:

  (1) The birth of Erichthonios, who is represented as received by
  Athena from Gaia emerging out of the earth, in the presence of
  Kekrops and his daughters. It only occurs on the later R.F. vases;
  the type closely resembles that of the birth of Dionysos (p. 19).

      B.M. E 372; Berlin 2537 = Reinach, i. 208 = _Wiener Vorl._ B. 12;
        Munich 345 = Reinach, i. 66; and Reinach, i. 113 = _Wiener
        Vorl._ iii. 2. Also a scene from the childhood of Erichthonios:
        B.M. E 788.

  (2) The reception of Dionysos in Attica (by Ikarios or Amphiktion).

      B 149, B 153, and E 166 in the British Museum appear to refer to
        this, but not certainly. See above, p. 56.

  (3) The story of Tereus and his daughters, Prokne and Philomela.[1437]

      (_a_) Tereus meeting Apate (Deceit); Prokne and Philomela in
        chariots.

        Naples 3233 = Reinach, i. 240.

      (_b_) Prokne and the dumb Philomela:

        Reinach, i. 308 (in Louvre).

      (_c_) Aedonaia slaying Itys.

        _J.H.S._ viii. p. 440 (= Munich 799_a_).

  (4) The three sons of Pandion, Lykos, Nisos, and Pallas,[1438] with
  Orneus the son of Erechtheus.

      Reinach, i. 510 = Roscher, ii. 2187.

  (5) The death of Prokris by the agency of Kephalos.

      B.M. E 477 (with Siren as soul of Prokris or death-deity).

  (6) Kreousa defended by Apollo from the attack of Ion.

      Reinach, i. 375: cf. Eur. _Ion._ 1250 ff.

  (7) Danaos taking refuge in Attica (?).

      Reinach, i. 244 = _Wiener Vorl._ iii. 4, 2 (in Louvre).

  (8) Echelos carrying off Basile.[1439]

      _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1895, p. 39: see p. 27.

  (9) The story of Diomos, the eponymous deme-hero (?).

      B.M. B 178 = _J.H.S._ xiii. p. 116.

  (10) Kodros, the last king of Athens.

      Bologna 273 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1998, fig. 2148 = _Jahrbuch_,
        1898, pl. 4.

The Kodros cup (completely published in _Wiener Vorl._ i. 4) is
decorated with groups of figures intended to illustrate the legendary
history of the great Attic families, in accordance with the
genealogising tendencies of the period (about 450 B.C.). The outer
scenes represent Theseus taking leave of Aigeus, and Ajax taking leave
of Lykos; and Aigeus and Ajax (Aias) are eponymous heroes of two Attic
tribes. On the Meidias vase in the British Museum[1440] we see a group
of Athenian tribal heroes, such as Akamas, Antiochos, Demophon, and
Hippothon, together with Medeia, who is also connected with Athens in
the Theseus scene of the Kodros cup.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Other isolated myths which occasionally appear on vases, but defy more
exact classification, may be briefly recorded here:

  (1) Admetos and Alkestis.

      Bibl. Nat. 918 = Reinach, i. 395 = Dennis, _Etruria_^2, ii.
        frontispiece. See also p. 69.

  (2) Agamedes and Trophonios as prisoners fed by Augias.

      Louvre E 632 = Reinach, i. 349 (see Paus. ix. 37, 5; _Ann. dell’
        Inst._ 1885, p. 130).

  (3) Agrios seized by Oineus and bound on the altar.

      B.M. F 155: see Anton. Liber. 37 and Vogel, _Scenen Eur. Trag._
        p. 125.

  (4) Atalante offering a cup to her antagonist Hippomenes.

      R.F. kotyle in B.M.

  (5) Atreus and Thyestes (the latter as suppliant in the former’s
  palace?).

      Millingen-Reinach, 23 = _Wiener Vorl._ B. 4, 1.

  (6) Daidalos and Ikaros, flight of.

      Naples 1767 = _Gaz. Arch._ 1884, pls. 1–2.

  (7) Glaukos in the tomb brought to life by the seer Polyeidos.

      B.M. D 5 = Plate XL.: see Apollod. iii. 3, 1.

  (8) Kanake’s suicide.

      Reinach, i. 448.

  (9) Laios, Keleos, Kerberos, and Aigolios stung by bees when stealing
  the honey on which the infant Zeus was fed.

      B.M. B 177: cf. Anton. Liber. 19 and Roscher, i. p. 154.

  (10) Lykourgos destroying his children in a frenzy.

      B.M. F 271; Naples 3219 = Reinach, i. 125, and 3237 = Baumeister,
        ii. pp. 834–35. See also Reinach, i. 333: Lykourgos slaying
        Thoas; and p. 56.

  (11) Melampus healing the daughters of Proitos from their madness at
  the altar of Artemis Lusia, in the presence of Dionysos.

      Naples 1760 = Millingen-Reinach, 52 = _Wiener Vorl._ B. 4, 3.

  (12) Merope (a scene from the tragedy of that name).

      Munich 810 = Reinach, i. 363: see Vogel, _Scenen Eur. Trag._ p.
        118.

  (13) Pandareos with the golden dog of Zeus, which he stole.

      Louvre A 478 = _Hermes_ 1898, p. 638; _Bull. de Corr. Hell._
        1898, p. 586.

  (14) Peleus wrestling with Atalante.

      Munich 125 (= Reinach, ii. 120 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl.
        31), and 584 = Reinach, ii. 88; Bibl. Nat. 818 = _Gaz. Arch._
        1880, pl. 14; Micali, _Mon. Ined._ pl. 41.

  (15) Peleus hunting a stag.

      Berlin 2538 = Reinach, ii. 162: cf. Apollod. iii. 13, 3.

[Illustration: FIG. 131. PENTHEUS SLAIN BY MAENADS (BRITISH MUSEUM).]

  (16) Pentheus torn to pieces by his mother Agave and the frenzied
  Maenads.

      B.M. E 775 = Fig. 131; Munich 807 = Baumeister, ii. p. 1204, fig.
        1396; Jatta 1617 = Müller-Wieseler, _Denkmaeler_, ii. 37, 436;
        _Jahrbuch_, 1892, pl. 5 (and see p. 154); _Gaz. Arch._ 1879,
        pls. 4–5 (?).

  (17) Phaon with Chryse and Philomele.

      Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 59 (vase in Palermo, formerly
        interpreted as Dionysos and Ariadne: see text, p. 296, for the
        correct interpretation).

  (18) Phineus invoking the gods.

      B.M. E 291 = _Wiener Vorl._ C. 8, 1. For other Phineus scenes,
        see pp. 81, 115.

  (19) The madness of Salmoneus.

      _Amer. Journ. of Arch._ 1899, pl. 4 (interpreted as Athamas): cf.
        _Class. Review_, 1903, p. 276 and Harrison, _Prolegomena to Gk.
        Religion_, p. 61.

  (20) Thoas placed in the chest by Hypsipyle.

      Berlin 2300 = Reinach, i. 273: see Ap. Rhod. i. 622, and Hartwig,
        _Meistersch._ p. 374.

  (21) Aktor and Astyoche (uncertain reference).

      _Jahrbuch_, 1902, pl. 2 (in Boston): see _ibid._ p. 68, _Il._ ii.
        513 and 658; _Schol. in_ Pind. _Ol._ vii. 42.

  (22) The foundation of Boiae in Laconia by the appearance of a hare.

      Reinach, ii. 333 = Inghirami, _Vasi Fitt._ 120 (this is
        exceedingly doubtful).

  (23) Two boys delivered to a Nymph (unknown myth).

      _Wiener Vorl._ E. 12, 3.

The story of =Orpheus= often finds a place on vases of the R.F.
period,[1441] but is chiefly confined to two episodes, his playing the
lyre among a group of Thracians[1442] (the men recognisable by their
costume, see p. 179), and his pursuit by the Thracian women[1443] and
subsequent death at their hands.[1444] In one scene his head after his
death is made use of as an oracle.[1445] He is often present in
under-world scenes (see p. 68), but not always in connection with the
fetching back of Eurydike.[1446]

_Thamyris_, a quasi-legendary figure, appears contending with the Muses
for pre-eminence with the lyre[1447]; on one fine R.F. vase he is
accompanied by Sappho,[1448] who, though strictly an historical
personage, appears among the Muses in quasi-mythical guise; he also
plays the lyre among Amazons.[1449] Other semi-historical persons
enveloped in a cloud of fable are: _Taras_, the founder of
Tarentum[1450]; _Midas_, who is generally represented with asses’ ears,
and is depicted judging the Seilenos who was caught in his rose-garden
and is led before him with hands tied[1451]; and _Minos_, who appears
at the slaying of the Minotaur by Theseus,[1452] and in the under-world
as one of the judges of souls.[1453]

                  *       *       *       *       *

Nor must we omit to mention the =Amazons=, who play such a large part
on Greek vases; besides their connection with various legendary events,
they are often employed purely as decorative figures. Mention has
already been made of their combats with Herakles and Theseus, and of
the part played by their queen Penthesileia in the Trojan War[1454];
and we also find them in such scenes as the Judgment of Paris[1455] and
Herakles’ fight with Kyknos.[1456] They also contend with
Gryphons[1457]; and many battle scenes in which they are opposed to
Greek warriors may also be here alluded to as not admitting of more
definite identification.[1458] They are further represented arming and
preparing for the fray,[1459] or setting out on horseback,[1460] or
defending a besieged city[1461]; and as decorative figures we see them
charging,[1462] stringing bows[1463] and discharging arrows,[1464]
blowing a trumpet,[1465] running by the side of a horse or checking a
restive animal,[1466] or fastening a shoe[1467]; or in peaceful
converse with a Greek warrior,[1468] or else without any distinguishing
action.[1469] Nearly all these subjects belong to the R.F. and later
periods.

                  *       *       *       *       *

We may conclude this section with an account of the monstrous
semi-human, semi-bestial creatures, which play a large part in the
decoration of Greek vases, and appear in connection with many legends.
Such are the Centaurs, half man, half horse; the Gorgons, winged women
with snaky locks; the Harpies, also found on early vases in the form of
winged women; and mythical creatures like Pegasos, the Chimaera, or the
Minotaur.

=The Centaurs=, who probably symbolise mountain torrents or other
forces of nature, appear (mostly on early vases) in combat with
Herakles, either in troops or in single combat, as in the stories of
Nessos, Dexamenos, and Eurytion[1470]; or, again, in the scenes so
often celebrated in the sculptured friezes and metopes of Greek
temples, where they contend with Theseus and Peirithoös,[1471] or with
the Thessalian Lapiths.[1472] Among the latter a common episode is the
death of Kaineus, whom the Centaurs buried in the earth, showering
rocks upon him.[1473] In a more peaceful aspect appear the aged
Centaurs, Pholos and Cheiron, especially in the stories of Herakles and
Achilles,[1474] both of whom are brought to the latter for their
youthful education.[1475] As the friend of Peleus Cheiron often assists
at his capture of Thetis.[1476] Centaurs, especially Pholos, are
sometimes represented returning from the chase,[1477] or as single
decorative figures[1478]; in one case they fight with cocks.[1479] Nike
in one or two instances is drawn in her chariot by male or female
Centaurs[1480]; and, finally, representations of youthful Centaurs are
found, though usually they are middle-aged.[1481]

=The Gorgons= appear almost exclusively in connection with the Perseus
legend,[1482] but are besides frequently found as decorative figures,
especially on B.F. vases,[1483] in the running attitude characteristic
of archaic art, in one case between two Sphinxes.[1484] Besides these,
the head or mask of the Gorgon Medusa, familiar at all periods as a
decorative motive of Greek art—first with an ugly and grotesque face,
afterwards refined and beautiful—is often found by itself on Greek
vases, especially as an interior central ornament of B.F. kylikes.[1485]

=Harpies=, conventionally associated through the medium of the Roman
poets[1486] with the human-headed bird-form which really denotes the
Siren, are found invariably on vases in the form of winged women.[1487]
They are, as has been elsewhere noted (p. 81), associated with the
Boreades[1488] as symbolical of evil and good influences of winds, and
probably should be regarded as personifications of the _southern_
breezes (the malevolent influence of which is seen in the sirocco).
Traditionally they were supposed to guard the Garden of the Hesperides
in Africa, whence the hot baleful winds come. The story of Phineus is
probably to be explained on these lines.[1489] A Harpy appears at the
recovery of Zeus’ golden dog from Pandareos.[1490]

That the human-headed bird represents a =Siren= in Greek art is amply
attested by the representations of Odysseus’ adventure with the vocal
enchantresses.[1491] Their appearance on the so-called Harpy monument
of Xanthos, however, shows them in another aspect, that of
death-deities[1492]—not necessarily of a violent and rapacious
character, as on a vase in Berlin,[1493] but gentle and kindly. So,
again, a Siren is represented in connection with a tomb[1494]; and in a
scene representing a banquet in Elysium they are depicted crowning the
dead.[1495] On some vases we find a Siren playing a flute or a lyre
(probably merely fanciful subjects)[1496]; or, again, two Sirens
kissing each other.[1497] As mere decorative motives their appearances
are countless, and many early vases are modelled in the form of
Sirens[1498]; sometimes they have human arms[1499]; in one case a
bird’s wings and a fish-tail[1500]; or, again, more anomalously,
bearded masculine heads.[1501] More rarely they are seen flying.[1502]

=The Sphinx= is familiar in the first place as the monster, half woman,
half dog, which vexed the city of Thebes till slain by Oedipus; this
story is often alluded to on vases,[1503] but many groups of a man and
a Sphinx have probably no special meaning.[1504] The Sphinx has
sometimes a sepulchral reference,[1505] and is grouped with other
figures, such as Atlas[1506] or a Seilenos[1507] (the latter probably a
scene from a Satyric drama). Like the Siren, she is exceedingly common
as a decorative figure,[1508] especially in the friezes of animals and
monsters so dear to the early vase-painters. Her invariable form is
that of a winged lion or dog with a woman’s bust.

=The Gryphon=, a kind of dragon composed of an eagle’s head and lion’s
body and legs (occasionally a bird’s), is almost exclusively
decorative[1509]; but on the later vases we find the fabulous combat of
the Oriental Arimaspi with the Gryphons who guarded the mountain of
gold in the Far East (cf. Plate XLII.)[1510]; or, again, they contend
with the Amazons,[1511] with Scythians,[1512] or with ordinary Greek
warriors.[1513] In one instance an Arimasp woman is seen shooting at a
Gryphon of curious type.[1514] Further, they draw the chariots of
deities, such as Persephone,[1515] and Dionysos[1516]; and we have
already seen Apollo coming on a Gryphon from the Hyperborean
regions.[1517]

_Pegasos_, the winged steed of Bellerophon, and the monster _Chimaera_
which he slew, also appear as decorative figures[1518]; and the former
draws the chariots of Apollo and of a woman,[1519] and also appears as
a constellation with the moon and stars.[1520] A human-headed monster
attacked by a hero seems to have been suggested by the Chimaera on a
companion vase.[1521] The _Minotaur_ is generally seen in connection
with Theseus, but also appears as a single or decorative figure,[1522]
and one vase appears to represent the youthful monster in his mother’s
lap.[1523] Other monsters found occasionally on vases are _Skylla_, who
appears, not in connection with the story of Odysseus, but with those
of Perseus and Andromeda,[1524] and Phrixos and Helle,[1525] or as a
single figure[1526]; and _Lamia_, a vampire or ogress in the form of a
hideous old woman, who is seen undergoing torture from Satyrs,[1527]
and in another unexplained scene.[1528] Another type of monster, the
serpent-footed giant _Typhon_, has already been mentioned.[1529] Yet
another and a unique type is that of the Nymphs with serpent bodies
which protect vines from the attacks of goats.[1530]

Lastly, another creation of fancy, though not strictly mythological, is
the ?ppa?e?t???? or “cock-horse,” a bird with horse’s head, which
appears on some B.F. vases ridden by a youth.[1531] This may also be a
convenient place for mentioning the common decorative subject of
Pygmies fighting with cranes.[1532]

                          HISTORICAL SUBJECTS

The number of vases on which undoubted historical subjects have been
discovered is very limited, though the old systems of interpretation
exerted much ingenuity in eliciting an historical meaning from many
scenes of daily life, with or without names inscribed over the figures.
In the instances given below, the names are given in most cases,
obviating all doubts. It is worth noting that the subjects chosen are
not as a rule those that would most obviously suggest themselves. They
fall into two classes, one relating to historical events and persons,
the other to literary celebrities:

I. (1) The weighing of silphium by Arkesilas, one of the descendants of
    Battos, who ruled at Kyrene—probably the second of the name (B.C.
    580–550). This scene occurs on a Cyrenaic cup in the Bibliothèque
    at Paris (_Cat._ 189: see Vol. I., p. 342, Fig. 92), which is
    probably a contemporary production.

 (2) Kroisos, the king of Lydia, on the funeral pyre (B.C. 545). See
    above, p. 6.

 Fig. 132 = Reinach, i. 85 = Baumeister, ii. p. 796, fig. 860 (in
    Louvre).

[Illustration:

  From _Baumeister_.
  FIG. 132. KROISOS ON THE FUNERAL PYRE (VASE IN LOUVRE).
]

 (3) Harmodios and Aristogeiton slaying the tyrant Hipparchos (B.C.
    510).

 B.F.: _Arch.-epigr. Mitth. aus Oesterr._ iii. (1879), pl. 6. R.F.;
    Reinach, i. 449; and see a late Panath. amph. in B.M. (B 605).

 (4) Diitrephes shot to death with arrows, B.C. 479 (?). See Paus. i.
    23, 3, and Frazer’s note.

 Bibl. Nat. 299 = _Jahrbuch_, 1892, p. 185 (but see Reinach, ii. p.
    255, and p. 15 under Gigantomachia).

 (5) The Persian king and queen.

 Helbig, p. 281 = Reinach, i. 275 (see Hartwig, _Meistersch._ p. 525).

 (6) The Persian king hunting.

 Petersburg, 1790 = Reinach, i. 23 (Xenophantos): cf. Naples 2992.

 (7) Dareios in council, with various deities and personifications as
    spectators.

 Naples 3253 = Reinach, i. 194 = Baumeister, i. pl. 6, fig. 449.

 (8) Battle of Greeks and Persians (with spectator-deities, etc.).

 Naples 3256 = Reinach, i. 98: see also p. 179; Reinach, ii. 84;
    Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pls. 55–56 and p. 518.

 (9) Battle of Greeks and Messapians.

 Berlin 3264 = Reinach, i. 270.

II. (1) Sappho.

     (_a_) As single figure.

 De Witte, _Coll. à l’Hôtel Lambert_, pl. 3.

     (_b_) With Alkaios.

 Fig. 133 = Munich 753 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1543, fig. 1607.

     (_c_) Reading her poems.

 Athens 1241 = Dumont-Pottier, pl. 6 = Reinach, i. 526.

     (_d_) In rivalry with Muses.

 Jatta 1538 = Reinach, i. 526.

     (_e_) With Eros (named Talas).

 _Abhandl. d. k. sächs. Gesellsch._ viii. (1861), pl. 1, fig. 1: see p.
    49.

 (2) Aesop.

 Helbig, 154 = Jahn, _Arch. Beitr._ pl. 12, fig. 2.

 (3) Anakreon.

 B.M. E 18: cf. E 266–67, 314–15; and see generally Jahn, _Gr. Dichter
    auf Vasenb._ in _Abhandl. d. k. sächs. Gesellsch._ viii. (1861), p.
    699 ff.

[Illustration:

  From _Baumeister_.
  FIG. 133. ALKAIOS AND SAPPHO (VASE IN MUNICH).
]

 (4) Kydias of Hermione (a lyric poet: cf. Schol. _in_ Ar. _Nub._ 967)
    and Nikarchos (a contemporary flute-player) are to be seen,
    according to Jahn (_op. cit._ p. 740) on a psykter in the British
    Museum (E 767), on which these names are inscribed over two
    revellers; but the identification is exceedingly doubtful. See also
    Munich 1096 = Jahn, _op. cit._ pl. 4, fig. 1.

III. Mention should also here be made of the names of historical renown
which often appear on R.F. vases with the word ?a??? (see Vol. I. p.
403, and below, p. 267), such as Alkibiades, Glaukon, Hipparchos,
Kleinias, Leagros, Megakles, and Miltiades. The question is dealt with
elsewhere, and it has been shown that only in one or two cases—_e.g._
Leagros, Glaukon, and Kleinias (the father of Alkibiades)—can an
identification with the historical personages be certainly maintained;
it is, however, of sufficient interest for reference in this chapter,
because the inscribed names may in some cases possibly refer to the
figures depicted on the vases.[1533]




                              CHAPTER XV
                      _SUBJECTS FROM ORDINARY LIFE_

    Religious subjects—Sacrifices—Funeral scenes—The Drama and
      burlesques—Athletics—Sport and games—Musical scenes—Trades and
      occupations—Daily life of women—Wedding scenes—Military and
      naval subjects—Orientals and Barbarians—Banquets and
      revels—Miscellaneous subjects—Animals.


It is hardly possible to give within brief limits all the illustrations
that the vases afford, either directly or indirectly, of the religious
and secular life of the Greeks. It is, however, feasible to classify
these subjects under several headings, and to give a list of the most
typical and popular in each case. Thus we have:

    1. Religious ceremonies and sacrifices.
    2. Funeral scenes and offerings at tombs.
    3. Subjects connected with the drama.
    4. Athletic contests, games and sport, and musical scenes.
    5. Trades and occupations.
    6. Scenes from daily life of women and children.
    7. Military and naval subjects.
    8. Oriental and barbarian figures.
    9. Miscellaneous subjects and compositions of no particular import.
    10. Animals (mostly only decorative).

                         1. RELIGIOUS SUBJECTS

These mostly appear in the form of sacrifices, either before a simple
altar, or before the statue of some deity, a cult-image, or terminal
figure. Thus we have representations of the offering of a bull to
Athena,[1534] sacrifices to a primitive image of Dionysos[1535] or to a
terminal figure of Hermes,[1536] or a sacrifice or libation to
Persephone, Apollo, or other deities.[1537] A procession of six maidens
carrying chairs and a boy with game is probably in honour of
Artemis[1538]; and in another scene we have the Dioskuri coming to the
Theoxenia or feast prepared in their honour.[1539] Many other examples
may be found under the heading of the various Olympian deities. In
other instances we see the preparations for a sacrifice,[1540] or a
procession of figures with victims and sacrificial implements[1541];
the victims are either rams,[1542] bulls,[1543] goats,[1544] or
pigs.[1545] Other scenes of sacrifice represent the roasting of a piece
of meat held on a spit over a blazing altar[1546]; or two men stand
over a large krater on a stand, accompanied by a flute-player.[1547] In
many cases the sacrifice is doubtless intended to celebrate a dramatic,
agonistic, or other victory.[1548]

Among other religious scenes we have the dedication of a tripod,[1549]
religious festival dances,[1550] praying figures,[1551] men or women
burning incense over an altar or incense-burner[1552]; or scenes of
libation,[1553] a Metragyrtes or mendicant priest praying before
devotees,[1554] and a priest examining the entrails of a ram.[1555] An
ephebos is initiated and purified by the ???? ??d???[1556]; oaths are
taken over a tomb,[1557] or omens from birds on a tumulus[1558]; and
here perhaps may be mentioned a man making a gesture against the evil
eye.[1559] There is also a scene illustrative of the ???????a, an
Athenian feast[1560]; and a possible representation of the feast of
Adonis, and the “gardens” or pots of flowers exhibited on that
occasion.[1561] Lastly, there are scenes relating to votive offerings,
such as a figure of a child on a column offered to Athena,[1562] a
youth carrying a votive tablet,[1563] and others in which similar
votive tablets occur.[1564] The number of scenes which can be shown to
relate to Athenian festivals, or bear on Greek religious belief and
ritual, might be greatly expanded and multiplied, but at present little
has been done in this direction.[1565]

                           2. FUNERAL SCENES

Closely connected with these religious subjects are those which played
so large a part in the life of the Greeks, and found such a strong
reflection in their decorative art—namely, those which relate to the
burial and cult of the dead. The relation of Greek vases to the tomb
has been discussed elsewhere (Vol. I. p. 141 ff.), and it is sufficient
here to repeat that there are only three or four classes of vases which
yield undoubted evidence that they were expressly made for funeral
purposes, each belonging to a different period of the art.

In the earliest period we have the great Dipylon vases (Vol. I. p.
285), many of which represent funeral processions and rows of mourning
women[1566]; these were made for standing outside the tomb. In the B.F.
period there are the prothesis-amphorae, made likewise for placing
first round the bier and then on the tomb, as plainly shown in one
instance[1567]; and in the R.F. period the Athenian white lekythi are
decorated almost exclusively with sepulchral scenes. Among the vases of
the decadence a whole series of Lucanian and Campanian hydriae and
Apulian kraters and amphorae, as well as some late Athenian vases, the
Apulian examples being usually of enormous size, equally betray the
special purpose for which they were made.

On the B.F. vases the commonest subject is the _prothesis_ or
_conclamatio_, where the body is exposed on the bier and the mourners
stand round in attitudes of grief,[1568] a subject also occasionally
found on the lekythi.[1569] Elsewhere we have the carrying of the bier
to the tomb,[1570] accompanied by warriors, and the _depositio_ or
placing of the body therein.[1571] On the vases of this period the tomb
invariably assumes the form of a mound (??µa or tumulus),[1572] as it
appears in some mythical scenes already described.[1573] On the
lekythi, on the other hand, the tomb is in the form of a tall plain
_stele_, on a stepped base, crowned with an ornament of acanthus-leaves
or a palmette, and wreathed with coloured sashes, while vases and
baskets of flowers are sometimes placed on the steps.[1574] On the
vases of Southern Italy it is developed either into a tall column with
altar-like base,[1575] or into a large shrine or _heroön_, with columns
in front and gabled roof, within which stands the figure of the
deceased,[1576] or sometimes an acanthus-plant[1577] or several
vases.[1578]

The subjects on the white lekythi and later vases almost invariably
take the form of mourners,[1579] or men and women making offerings to
the dead, or placing sashes, wreaths, and vases on the tomb.[1580] Or,
again, we may note interesting parallels with the Athenian sepulchral
reliefs of the fourth century, which are mostly contemporaneous with
the vases.[1581] Thus we have “farewell scenes” between a man and
woman,[1582] or between two women[1583]; or the equestrian figure of a
warrior, as on the famous _stele_ of Dexileos,[1584] or a warrior
charging with his spear[1585]; or, again, a hare-hunt at a tomb,
perhaps with reference to the occupations of the deceased.[1586]
Sometimes the tomb of a warrior is indicated by his armour.[1587] The
interior of a tomb is occasionally shown, with a dead boy in it,[1588]
or a series of vases,[1589] or as in the story of Polyeidos.[1590] In
one instance a group of figures is placed on the top of the tomb.[1591]
Mythological figures are sometimes introduced, as Charon ferrying the
dead in his bark,[1592] or Hermes Psychopompos[1593]; or the type of
Thanatos and Hypnos (or that of Boreas and Zephyros) with Memnon is
borrowed for that of a warrior, a youth, or a woman whom they place in
the tomb.[1594] Occasionally we see the soul of the deceased as a small
flitting winged figure.[1595] On the Italian vases the figure of the
deceased usually appears inside the _heroön_, painted white, as if to
indicate a sculptured marble figure: a warrior with armour,[1596] or a
youth with his horse or dog,[1597] or pouring a libation from a
kantharos.[1598] These _heroa_ are always surrounded by figures of
women bearing baskets of offerings, unguent-vases, and wreaths, and by
youths as mourners.[1599]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                                PLATE LV

[Illustration:

  SCENES FROM FUNERAL LEKYTHI (BRITISH MUSEUM).
  1, PROTHESIS; 2, CULT OF TOMB.
]

         ------------------------------------------------------

Apart from the under-world scenes already described,[1600] the future
life is not illustrated by the vases, except in a curious scene on a
B.F. Cyrenaic cup, representing a banquet of the blessed, attended by
Sirens.[1601] There is also one single representation of the subject so
common on later Greek reliefs—the sepulchral banquet.[1602]

                              3. THE DRAMA

The relation of vase-paintings to the drama has already been discussed
in Chapter XI., in which it has been shown how the tragedies of
Euripides and the farces of Rhinthon influenced the artists of Southern
Italy. It may, however, be worth while to recapitulate here the actual
representations of actors or of scenes taking place on a stage,
together with some account of the numerous burlesques of mythical
subjects.

On one curious B.F. vase (probably late and imitative) we see a rude
representation of a tragic and a comic chorus,[1603] and occasionally
on vases of this period we find figures of actors dressed up as birds,
or otherwise in comic fashion.[1604] More important in this connection
are the fifth-century vases found on the site of the Cabeiric temple at
Thebes, several of which have parodies of well-known subjects, such as
Odysseus and Kirke, or Peleus bringing the young Achilles to
Cheiron.[1605] It seems probable that these scenes are actual
reproductions of burlesque performances connected with the worship of
the Kabeiri.

We look in vain for representations of scenes from Aristophanes and the
Old Comedy, though there are one or two vases which recall (if nothing
more) episodes in the _Acharnians_[1606] and _Frogs_.[1607] But for the
rest, these comic scenes are almost confined to the vases of Southern
Italy, especially those made at Paestum, with their presentations of
the f??a?e? or fourth-century farces. A fairly exhaustive list of these
was made some years ago by Heydemann,[1608] and probably requires
little emendation as yet; we repeat below a number of the more
interesting subjects, and others may be collected from the foregoing
pages in which myths are burlesqued (the Judgment of Paris, the
apotheosis of Herakles, Oedipus and the Sphinx, etc.).[1609]

    (1) Zeus visiting Alkmena: Schreiber-Anderson, 5, 8 = Heydemann,
      _loc. cit._ p. 276: cf. B.M. F 150.

    (2) Apollo healing the Centaur Cheiron: B.M. F 151.

    (3) Herakles at Delphi; Apollo takes refuge on the roof of the
      temple: Reinach, i. 153, 2 = Rayet and Collignon, p. 318.

    (4) Combat of Hephaistos (Daidalos) and Ares (Enyalios): B.M. F 269.

    (5) Herakles with the Kerkopes: Schreiber-Anderson, 5, 2 =
      Heydemann p. 281.

    (6) Herakles seizing Auge: Fig. 105, Vol. I. p. 474 = Reinach, i.
      123 = Heydemann, p. 279.

    (7) Burlesque of the story of Antigone: Reinach, i. 273.

    (8) Rape of the Palladion: B.M. F 366.

    (9) Death of Priam: Berlin 3045 = Reinach, i. 370, 8.

    (10) Odysseus and Kirke: Jatta 901 = Heydemann, p. 271.

    (11) Odysseus in Phaeacia: Reinach, i. 153, 1.

[Illustration: FIG. 134. SCENE FROM A FARCE (BRITISH MUSEUM, F 189).]

Other scenes represent single figures, such as Herakles,[1610] or Taras
on the dolphin[1611]; or subjects from farces of daily life, such as an
actor with a table of cakes[1612] or the drunken return from a
revel.[1613] Many scenes, again, have some reference to the Satyric
drama, as on the fine vase in Naples, where Dionysos and other figures
attend the preparations for a performance of that kind[1614]; or such
scenes as that of Hera and Iris attacked by Seileni,[1615] or those
relating to adventures of Herakles and Perseus with Satyrs.[1616] Other
subjects have no particular significance, such as an actor attired as a
Seilenos playing on the flute, or dancing, or with a Sphinx,[1617]
groups of actors[1618] (in one case dressing[1619]), a comic actor
among Satyrs and Maenads,[1620] and single figures.[1621] Some, which
are apparently mythological, defy explanation.[1622]

The influence of Tragedy on vase-paintings is an indirect one, and
entirely confined to the vases of Southern Italy on the one hand, and
to the plays of Euripides on the other. The subject has been discussed
at length elsewhere in this work,[1623] and it is unnecessary here to
give a list of the subjects on South Italian vases which can be traced
to the influence of Euripides. It has also been pointed out that this
influence made itself felt, not only in the actual choice of subjects,
but generally in their treatment and arrangement, in the
quasi-architectural setting of many scenes, and in the elaborate
costumes of the figures.

[Illustration: FIG. 135. ATHLETES ENGAGED IN THE PENTATHLON (BRITISH
MUSEUM, B 134).]

                         4. ATHLETICS AND SPORT

From the theatre we naturally turn to the palaestra and gymnasium,
which played so important a part in the public and private life of the
Greeks, and, like the former, may be said to be vested with a religious
significance, as exemplified in the Olympic and other great games.
Hardly any class of subject is found so frequently and consistently on
the vases. The series of Panathenaic amphorae alone supply instances of
every form of athletic exercise in which the Greeks indulged.[1624]
Many vases, especially the R.F. kylikes, represent groups of athletes
in the palaestra engaged in various exercises, such as boxing,
wrestling, running, and leaping[1625]; in other cases we have single
groups of boxers[1626] or wrestlers,[1627] or of the pa????t???, a
somewhat brutal combination of the two.[1628] A boxer is sometimes seen
putting on his caestus.[1629] The p??ta????, which played so important
a part in the national games, is not infrequently found, though often
only three or four out of the five contests appear.[1630] Here, again,
we also find single figures of diskos-throwers[1631] or
javelin-throwers,[1632] representations of the long-jump,[1633] and men
marking the ground with a pick-axe or poles.[1634] An athlete is seen
binding round his javelin the cord or ?????? by which it was
thrown,[1635] and the pick-axe afore-mentioned also appears in such a
way as to indicate its general use by athletes—viz. for digging up the
ground over which jumps were made, by way of exercising the
limbs.[1636] A variation of the javelin contest was one in which the
competitors were mounted, and aimed at a shield set up as a target as
they rode past.[1637] Other important contests are the foot-race[1638];
the horse-race, generally taken part in by boys (????te?)[1639]; the
chariot-race[1640]; the torch-race (?aµpad?d??µ?a)[1641]; and the race
of armed warriors (?p??t?d??µ?a).[1642] In the latter contest various
types may be distinguished: the arming for the race[1643]; the
start[1644]; the race itself, with runners turning at the end of the
stadion[1645]; the finish[1646]; and a variation in which the runner
carried his armour.[1647] On the earlier vases this race is run in full
armour; on the later, only with helmets and shields. Frequently the
victorious athlete, horseman, or hoplite is seen proclaimed as
winner,[1648] and receiving his prize[1649]; also receiving a crown
from Nike.[1650]

Among more miscellaneous scenes may be mentioned athletes anointing
themselves[1651] and using the strigil[1652]; the ??????µa??a or
quintain[1653]; an athlete expiring[1654]; a girl-runner wounded in the
foot[1655]; men rolling discs[1656]; acrobats[1657] and female tumblers
performing contortions over swords, or lifting objects with their
feet.[1658] To the list of palaestra scenes may be added those where
Nike or another deity appears as patron of the palaestra watching the
athletes,[1659] and scenes of ephebi washing or bathing in preparation
for or after their contests.[1660] The athletes are often accompanied
by trainers, who use a forked stick to direct their movements.[1661] On
the later R.F. and the Italian vases it is a regular thing to find on
the reverse a roughly painted group of two or three athletes or ephebi,
usually wrapped in himatia and conversing together[1662]; in such cases
the palaestra is indicated by a pair of jumping-weights or a ball
suspended.

Subjects coming under the heading of what we call =Sport= are not so
common, and are practically limited to hunting scenes. They include
hare-hunts,[1663] stag-hunts,[1664] wolf-hunts and fox-hunts,[1665]
lion-hunts,[1666] and boar-hunts[1667]; in the latter on early B.F.
vases the figures often have fancy names, with a reference in some
cases to the hunt of the Calydonian boar, which created the type. Some,
especially B.F. vases, depict the departure of a hunter for the
chase,[1668] or his return loaded with game[1669]; or we see a party of
hunters resting (all with fancy names).[1670] A group of youths
capturing and taming a bull may also be mentioned here,[1671] and
horse-taming is similarly depicted.[1672] We see horses being
unharnessed, groomed, and watered,[1673] or exercised,[1674] and a man
with a backing horse[1675]; and we may also perhaps include among these
subjects scenes representing riding-lessons, a school for ephebi,[1676]
or a boy learning to mount a horse.[1677] A favourite subject for the
interiors of R.F. cups is that of a young Athenian on horseback,[1678]
often in Oriental or Thracian costume (see p. 179).[1679] On the B.F.
vases a horseman or a chariot is sometimes depicted in front view, a
notable exception to the preference of the time,[1680] and sometimes a
three-horse chariot takes the place of the quadriga.[1681] Among
miscellaneous chariot-scenes may be mentioned a goddess (?) and a hero
mounting chariots,[1682] a girl in a chariot drawn by hinds[1683]; and
people travelling in a country cart.[1684]

Among the various =Games= popular with Greek youths the favourite
is, perhaps, that of ball, which was often played by men mounted on
each other’s shoulders in two parties, this being known as
?fed??sµ??[1685]; a rougher variant, in which the ball was omitted
and victory was probably gained by overthrowing the opponent pair,
was known as ????t???.[1686] Women and children also play at ball,
as does Eros.[1687] Equally popular was cock-fighting[1688]; and we
also see a group of boys shooting with bow and arrows at a popinjay
or figure of a bird.[1689] Of indoor amusements the favourite is
the ??ttaß??, a popular relaxation after a banquet, often seen on
kylikes and other R.F. vases.[1690] Other games, more suitable to
younger boys, are top-spinning[1691] and bowling a hoop[1692];
others, again, in which boys and girls join, or even occasionally
Eros and Satyrs, are the games of _morra_ (_micare digitis_, or
“How many fingers do I hold up?”),[1693] and its variant, the
?µ???a, played with knucklebones[1694]; swinging[1695] and
see-sawing[1696]; and flying a kite.[1697] A game of similar
character to the _morra_ is played by a winged girl, who places her
hands over the eyes of a boy in a chair.[1698] The so-called magic
wheel, which was twirled on a string, is almost exclusively used by
Eros on the vases of Southern Italy.[1699] Children with their
toys, such as go-carts, vases of various shapes, etc., are often
depicted on the smaller R.F. vases of the fine style, some of which
were perhaps actually made for playthings[1700]; and we often see
them accompanied by pet dogs, tortoises, and other animals.[1701]
Similarly there are representations of birds and beasts kept in
cages,[1702] and of grown-up people playing with pets: a youth and
girl with a mouse or jerboa,[1703] or a man with a Maltese
dog.[1704]

Equal in importance in the eyes of the Greeks was the other great
division of their education, µ??s???; the wider sense in which they
used the word, the culture of the mind as opposed to that of the body
(??µ?ast???), admits of including under this heading school scenes as
well as musical performances. Among the former is the well-known kylix
of Duris in Berlin (Plate XXXIX.),[1705] where a teacher is seen
unrolling a manuscript on which appears an epic hexameter (see Chapter
XVII.); a pupil is about to write on tablets; and others undergo
instruction on the flute and lyre. Elsewhere we see a youth writing on
a tablet,[1706] or on his way to school[1707]; a man reading from a
roll[1708]; and a vivid representation of a schoolmaster giving a
writing lesson.[1709]

Lessons in music,[1710] singing,[1711] and dancing[1712] are by no
means infrequently represented, especially on R.F. vases; we have
already seen the young Herakles and Iphikles receiving instruction of
this kind,[1713] and on the vases both boys and girls take part in the
lessons. Dancing scenes include dances of maidens (very common on early
B.F. vases), or single figures of dancers[1714]; a girl dancing to the
flute or with castanets,[1715] or a youth to the music of a girl[1716];
a woman dancing the Pyrrhic dance in the attire of a warrior,[1717] and
a sacred Lydian dancer with her wicker head-dress.[1718] The grotesque
dancers on some early B.F. vases appear to be performing the
_kordax_.[1719]

Groups of musicians with no particular signification are often found,
generally playing the lyre and flute,[1720] or single figures, such as
a lyre-player in female costume,[1721] or in the distinctive
????st?d??? of the musician.[1722] Other scenes relate to agonistic and
musical competitions, which often formed part of the great games; thus
we have on some Panathenaic vases and elsewhere contests for victory
with the lyre[1723] or flute.[1724] Sometimes the victorious musician
appears receiving the prize[1725] or a crown from Nike[1726]; he
usually stands on a _bema_ or raised platform. On one vase a poet
recites an epic to the sound of the flute; the opening words appear
proceeding from his mouth.[1727] On another a man is seen tuning his
lyre.[1728] Singing was a common recreation of banqueters or revellers,
especially as seen on R.F. vases.[1729]

[Illustration:

  From _Baumeister_.
  FIG. 136. AGRICULTURAL SCENES (CUP BY NIKOSTHENES IN BERLIN).
]

                       5. TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS

The trades and occupations represented on vases are very varied,
ranging from mining to shoemaking. The representations of miners in
caves which appear on some of the early Corinthian _pinakes_[1730] most
probably refer to the digging out of the clay for the potteries rather
than to mining for metals. This seems the more probable when it is
taken into consideration that potters’ workshops and furnaces are so
frequently depicted in the same series.[1731] Besides these we find
later instances of potters turning vases on the wheel,[1732] painting
them, or finishing them off,[1733] as already described in a previous
chapter: one vase represents the interior of a potter’s workshop with
vases in various stages[1734]; another, a man painting the design with
a sort of quill.[1735] Young men and girls are depicted negotiating the
purchase of completed vases in the shop.[1736] Another of the
Corinthian _pinakes_[1737] represents the exportation of vases in a
ship. Metal-work is represented by a well-known R.F. kylix in
Berlin,[1738] showing a bronze foundry, with statues in various stages
of completion; there are also representations of a smithy,[1739] in
some of which writers have seen an allusion to Hephaistos and the
Kyklopes (see p. 37). A man is depicted finishing off a bronze
helmet,[1740] or carrying a completed terminal figure[1741]; and of
similar import is the subject of Athena modelling a horse.[1742]

Agriculture is represented by vases in Berlin and the Louvre with
scenes of men ploughing with oxen (Fig. 136) or hoeing, sowers, and
mules carrying sacks of grain[1743]; and certain vase-paintings have
been interpreted as referring to the digging of a well.[1744] A man is
seen cutting down a tree,[1745] and another birds’-nesting.[1746]
Shepherds with flocks of sheep and goats are seen on two early Boeotian
vases,[1747] and also fishermen,[1748] and men crushing grapes in a
wine-press.[1749] The various stages of oil-making include the
gathering of the olives from a tree,[1750] the pressing in an
oil-press,[1751] and lastly the merchant measuring out and selling his
oil.[1752] A butcher is represented cutting up meat,[1753] and also the
preparing and cutting up of a tunny-fish,[1754] and the baking of
bread[1755]; on a B.F. vase two men weigh goods in a balance[1756]; and
the export of the silphium (?) on the Arkesilas vase may also be
mentioned here.[1757] Lastly, we have a shoemaker in his shop,[1758] a
carpenter working with an adze,[1759] and a boy going to market with
two baskets carried on a pole.[1760]

                         6. DAILY LIFE OF WOMEN

Scenes from the daily life of women form our next heading, and we
include therewith those relating to marriage or preparations for
nuptials, which play so important a part in woman’s life. The “type” of
a marriage procession on B.F. vases is, as we have seen (p. 16, and
Vol. I. p. 378), liable to be confused with the subject of the marriage
of Zeus and Hera; the bride and bridegroom appear in a four-horse
chariot, accompanied by persons who, if not deities, at any rate bear
similar attributes, such as the caduceus of Hermes or the torches of
Artemis (as _pronuba_).[1761] In scenes of simpler character the
wedding party walk in procession or drive in a cart.[1762] On later
vases the bride is generally led by the hand by her husband,
accompanied as before in appropriate fashion.[1763] We also find scenes
representing the bridal pair on their marital couch (_lectus
genialis_),[1764] and the return of the bride after the
ceremonies.[1765] Other scenes may possibly represent a
betrothal,[1766] a bridal toilet,[1767] or a nuptial sacrifice,[1768]
and, finally, the arrival of the bridal pair at their house, with a
servant preparing the marriage-bed.[1769]

More common, especially on R.F. vases of the fine style, are scenes
taken from the life of the women’s apartments (???a?????t??),[1770]
such as women at their toilet,[1771] spinning wool,[1772] or bleaching
linen,[1773] or embroidering.[1774] Under the heading of toilet scenes
are included single figures of women arranging their hair,[1775]
painting their faces,[1776] fastening on their girdles[1777] or
shoes,[1778] or putting clothes in a wardrobe.[1779] They also play
with cats or dogs[1780] or pet birds,[1781] and there is a subject
identified as a “consolation” scene.[1782] Again, we see women bathing
both in private and public baths,[1783] or even swimming[1784]; but in
some of these scenes the bath merely forms part of the toilet. Many of
these toilet scenes may perhaps be idealised and regarded as groups of
Aphrodite, the Graces, etc.[1785]

A favourite subject, but almost confined to the B.F. hydriae, is that
of maidens with pitchers on their heads fetching water from a fountain,
which is usually in the form of a building with columns and lion’s-head
spouts of water; the maidens, five or six in number, carry the empty
hydriae flat on their heads, the full ones upright.[1786] Women are
sometimes seen in gardens or orchards, gathering fruit[1787] or (on
late R.F. vases) frankincense.[1788] Other miscellaneous scenes which
cannot be classified are: a woman in bed,[1789] woman with
foot-pan,[1790] at a meal,[1791] reading from a scroll,[1792] burning
incense,[1793] spinning a top,[1794] balancing a stick,[1795] riding in
a mule-car[1796]; two or more women wrapped in one large cloak[1797];
and an accouchement scene.[1798] Those in which children appear include
a nurse and child[1799]; a child learning to walk[1800]; a mother, and
a child in a high chair[1801]; and a woman beating a child with a
slipper[1802]; subjects of children playing with toys, etc., have
already been discussed (p. 167). Finally, there are the scenes in which
women appear as jugglers[1803] or performing dances in armour,[1804] of
which mention has been made; these were probably amusements associated
with banquets (see p. 182; also _ibid._ for banquets in which women,
_i.e._ courtesans, take part).

A very common decoration of vases, especially the inferior ones of
Apulia, is that of a woman’s head, either as the main subject or in
some subsidiary part of the decoration; these, however, are so common
that they hardly call for detailed description.[1805]

                     7. MILITARY AND NAVAL SUBJECTS

Subjects of a military character on vases are chiefly confined to
three—the arming of warriors,[1806] their setting out in chariots, on
horseback, or on foot,[1807] and combats of two or more figures.[1808]
In all these cases we are confronted with the often-recurring
difficulty as to when such subjects have a mythological significance.
Especially on B.F. vases, familiar types—such as the departure of
Hector or the combat of Achilles and Memnon, to be identified in other
cases by inscriptions—occur again and again in the same form, only
diversified by the varying number of bystanders, which is generally
regulated by the space at the painter’s disposal. Even when names are
added they are often of a fanciful kind; and thus, for instance, we
find combats between Homeric heroes which have no counterpart in
literary record.[1809]

In the scenes of warriors arming we may note certain motives as
recurring with more or less frequency—such as that of a warrior putting
on his greaves,[1810] helmet,[1811] or cuirass (Fig. 137),[1812] or
lacing up his helmet.[1813] Kindred subjects are that of a warrior
taking his shield out of his case,[1814] or an archer drawing an arrow
from his quiver,[1815] testing an arrow,[1816] or stringing his
bow.[1817] We may also note the rarer occurrence of such scenes as the
harnessing of a chariot (Frontispiece)[1818] or the equipping of a
war-horse.[1819] In the departure scenes the usual type on B.F. vases
is that of a four-horse chariot to the right, which the warrior is
mounting or has mounted; a woman sometimes give him drink, and an old
man stands at the horses’ heads. This “type” is used for the departure
of Amphiaraos (cf. Berlin 1655), Hector, or other heroes.[1820] It is
sometimes varied by placing the quadriga to the front.[1821] Or, again,
the warrior is seen on horseback, accompanied by his groom,[1822] or a
company on foot set out in marching array.[1823] On later vases the
more usual version is that of a warrior receiving a libation or
“stirrup-cup” from a woman before his departure, but the same scenes
might be interpreted as referring to his successful return.[1824]
Unmistakable instances of the return are those scenes where he receives
a crown,[1825] or is brought back as a corpse by his comrades.[1826]
There are scenes representing warriors taking oaths or omens at a tomb,
or omens by the inspection of the liver of a victim, all before
departure for battle[1827]; and single figures are countless,
especially inside R.F. kylikes.[1828]

[Illustration:

  From _Hoppin_.
  FIG. 137. WARRIOR ARMING; SCYTHIAN ARCHERS (AMPHORA BY EUTHYMIDES
  IN MUNICH).
]

Among the various scenes incident to warfare may be mentioned an
ambuscade,[1829] a wounded warrior dragged out of battle,[1830] a
warrior protecting himself from darts,[1831] the capture of a
prisoner,[1832] warriors carrying dead bodies,[1833] or human heads as
trophies of victory.[1834] Besides single figures of warriors,
heralds,[1835] trumpeters,[1836] slingers,[1837] and archers[1838]
often appear; or representations of the armour of a warrior[1839]; or
of the ????µas?a or parade of Athenian knights.[1840] Of a somewhat
burlesque character is a scene depicting warriors riding on ostriches
and dolphins.[1841]

                  *       *       *       *       *

Naval scenes are very rare, but we find occasional early
representations of sea-fights,[1842] as on the Dipylon vases, the
vessels on which appear to be biremes.[1843] On the B.F. and R.F. vases
we find war-galleys[1844] or merchant-vessels,[1845] usually in places
suitable for a row of ships—such as the outer edge of a kylix[1846] or
the broad rim of a _deinos_ or large bowl.[1847] These are specially
common on vases of “mixed” technique. The subject of “keel-hauling,”
the punishment administered to refractory sailors, must also find a
place here.[1848]

                      8. ORIENTALS AND BARBARIANS

Oriental figures which can neither be classified as mythological,
historical, or _genre_ subjects sometimes appear on vases. We have
already made mention of such quasi-mythological subjects as combats of
Gryphons with Arimaspi or other figures in Oriental attire.[1849]
Phrygian warriors, too, may be seen in some Trojan scenes—such as the
sack of Troy or the flight of Aeneas[1850]—but their presence in scenes
of departure or combat does not necessarily make the subject
mythological.[1851] It is not always easy to identify the nationality
of these barbarians, and the names usually given to them—Persian,
Phrygian, or Scythian—must in many cases be regarded as somewhat
conventional, except where details of costume are unmistakable.[1852]

Archers in Oriental costumes, wearing peaked caps with long lappets,
and close-fitting costume of jerkin and trousers (??a????de?), stippled
over to indicate skin, are seen shooting arrows, on foot or on
horseback,[1853] or accompanying the chariots of Greek warriors,[1854]
or taking part in general combats[1855]; as also warriors blowing
trumpets.[1856] Persian warriors in combat with Greeks appear on R.F.
vases of the strong period,[1857] and may have some reference to the
historical events of the time. It is even suggested that one is copied
from the famous painting by Mikon of the battle of Marathon.[1858] One
vase represents a sort of triumphal procession, perhaps of a Persian
king, riding on a camel[1859]; and others depict Persians riding.[1860]
Those of undoubted historical signification have already been
mentioned.[1861] Scythians appear as mounted or unmounted
archers,[1862] a Scythian horseman is attacked by a lion,[1863] a
Scythian pursues two courtesans,[1864] and there is a curious scene
depicting the revels of the Scythian Agathyrsi.[1865] Thracians, in the
typical local costume of ?e??a (a thick cloak) and ???pe?? (a fox-skin
cap), appear by themselves or with Orpheus and Boreas[1866]; Thracian
horsemen are represented setting out[1867]; and after the conquests of
Miltiades the local costume appears to have become fashionable among
the Athenian youth, as they are depicted wearing it on some
contemporary vases.[1868] The Thracian custom of tattooing is suggested
in some of the Orpheus scenes.[1869]

Figures of negroes are not very common on vases, though many of
fifth-century date and later are modelled in the form of negroes’
heads; but there is a small class of B.F. alabastra on which they are
represented in the traditional barbarian costume of trousers, etc., and
are armed with the Oriental battle-axe.[1870] In one case a negro
accompanies a camel.[1871] Ethiopians are seen conveying the body of
Memnon or an ordinary warrior to his grave,[1872] and one vase
represents an Ethiopian with a jug.[1873] A pair of Egyptian combatants
can be identified on a fragmentary vase from Daphnae (Defenneh).[1874]
Lastly, many of the vases of Southern Italy, especially those of
Campania, represent combats or leave-takings of native Osco-Samnite
warriors, in their typical costume of triangular cuirass, gaily plumed
helmet, and scanty tunic.[1875]

[Illustration: FIG. 138. BANQUETERS PLAYING KOTTABOS (BRITISH MUSEUM, E
70).]

                         9. BANQUETS AND REVELS

A group of subjects which play an important part on vases of all
periods, especially the height of the R.F. style, but which do not
exactly fall under any of the headings so far enumerated, is that of
scenes connected with banquets and revels, especially of Athenian
ephebi. In the ordinary “type” of banquets at all periods (as in other
branches of art) the participants recline on couches on their left
elbows, the right arm being free to use, and that hand often holding a
drinking-cup or other appropriate attribute.[1876] In this fashion the
gods—such as Dionysos, Hermes, or Herakles after his apotheosis—indulge
in the pleasures of the banquet and the wine-cup.[1877] There are
scenes which represent the preparations for a banquet,[1878] or young
men on their way thither[1879]; and in those depicting the feast itself
a table is often placed before the couch, on which viands of various
kinds are seen[1880]; or the krater (mixing-bowl) stands by, ready for
the drinkers to replenish their cups.[1881] Vases are also filled by
means of a funnel.[1882] The results of over-indulgence are sometimes
realistically indicated on the R.F. cups.[1883] After the
drinking-bouts come amusements of various kinds, notably the game of
the kottabos.[1884] No instances of this occur before the middle of the
R.F. period, and on the cups of that time it is usually only indicated
by the manner in which the banqueters twirl their kylikes with a finger
crooked in the handle,[1885] preparatory to throwing the remaining
drops of liquid at the little figure on the top of the kottabos-stand,
the hitting of which caused part of the apparatus to fall with a
ringing noise.[1886] On the latest Athenian and many Apulian vases the
stand is often represented as well,[1887] not only in position for the
game, but borne along by revellers.[1888] It is also carried by
Seileni, Maenads, or Eros, and used by Dionysos at his banquets.[1889]

Other amusements take the form of music and dancing. The banqueters
themselves play the lyre or flute,[1890] or listen to male and female
performers on those instruments,[1891] or a young girl dances for their
amusement.[1892] The women jugglers, tumblers, and acrobatic
sword-dancers who often appear on late vases[1893] no doubt often
contributed to the entertainment of the “gilded youth” of their day.
Sometimes a banqueter is represented reclining on his couch and
singing, the words in one or two cases being inscribed as proceeding
out of his mouth.[1894] Not only men but women are represented
banqueting, as on the psykter by Euphronios at Petersburg, which has a
group of courtesans.[1895] This character also appears on the R.F.
vases at the men’s banquets.[1896]

The ??µ?? or revel is equally popular with the banquet. It usually
takes the form of a procession of young and elderly men in various
unrestrained attitudes,[1897] dancing,[1898] singing,[1899] playing the
lyre, flute, or other instruments,[1900] carrying drinking-cups and
other vessels,[1901] or balancing them in sportive manner.[1902]
Frequently these ??µ?? scenes are of a Dionysiac character, the god
himself, Seileni, Satyrs, and Maenads taking part,[1903] and sometimes
human beings are mingled with them. On a vase of the series connected
with the comic stage (Fig. 134, p. 161) a father is seen dragging a
drunken youth home from a banquet; but these scenes of rioting are not
always necessarily conceived as taking place before or after social
festivities. On a red-figured cup at Petersburg the subject of the
return from the feast of the Brauronian Dionysos is depicted in most
realistic fashion, the revellers indulging in all sorts of buffoonery
and fantastic actions, which suggest an Athenian counterpart of modern
Bank Holiday amusements[1904]!

To turn to a subject of a quieter character, what may be termed “love
scenes” are not uncommon on vases, especially of the later period. On
the Apulian vases indeed such subjects are innumerable. The usual type,
occasionally found on earlier vases,[1905] is that of a youth and a
seated girl exchanging presents, such as mirrors, wreaths, baskets of
fruit or jewel-boxes, Eros being frequently present.[1906] Scenes of
this kind were originally interpreted somewhat fantastically, as having
some reference to the Eleusinian or other mysteries,[1907] an idea
which no one would now seriously hold. Similar scenes which have no
particular import, such as groups of women, often with Eros, occur on
many R.F. vases of the later fine style, especially the pyxides and
lekythi.[1908] They are all clearly fanciful, and belong to an age when
tastes resembled those of the eighteenth century in their
artificiality. There are also some instances, especially on the R.F.
vases, where the sentiment is more definitely expressed, and couples
are seen embracing or caressing one another in amorous fashion.[1909]
It is not necessary to make more than passing allusion to the many
vases on which this harmless sentiment is replaced by coarseness and
open indecency of treatment, some of which, however, belong to the very
finest stage of red-figure painting.

Finally, we may mention here a few subjects of a _genre_ character
which seem to defy classification, and yet are sufficiently definite to
require separate mention. Such are the scenes so common on the
interiors of R.F. kylikes, which represent ephebi in all kinds of
attitudes, or carrying all sorts of objects, the great aim of the
artist being to find the most suitable design to fill in the circular
space.[1910] Thus we have such subjects as a youth putting on a greave
or sandals,[1911] carrying a wine-amphora[1912] or a lyre,[1913]
playing with castanets,[1914] or pursuing a hare[1915]; reclining at a
banquet[1916]; armed with a club or a large stone[1917]; a man leading
a leopard,[1918] and a man who seems from his gestures to be treading
unawares on a snake[1919]; and others of an athletic or military
character, of which mention has already been made. There are also many
subjects which appear to have a meaning, yet are not mythological, and
cannot be satisfactorily explained; such instances it would, however,
hardly be profitable to describe in detail.

                              10. ANIMALS

The last class of subjects with which this section has to deal is that
of animals, as considered apart from human beings, or objects of what
modern painters term “still life.” In the historical chapters of this
work it has been shown what a large part the animal world played in the
decoration of vases down to the sixth century B.C., and also which were
the animals most frequently selected for the friezes and other
decorations of early vases. Most noteworthy in this respect are the
Mycenaean vases (Vol. I. p. 273), with their representations of
cuttle-fish (Plate XV.), the nautilus or argonaut,[1920] and other
marine subjects. But to these early vases in the present case no
further allusion need be made; as _subjects_ they have not as a rule
sufficient interest. On the Attic vases of the B.F. and R.F. periods
animals rarely form a principal subject on vases, though they still
sometimes appear in small friezes on the less important parts of the
vase; it may, therefore, be of interest to note a few typical instances
in which this feature retains its prominence. Sometimes we have
subjects with action: as, for instance, one in which a panther tears a
stag, and is attacked by an archer and an armed warrior[1921]; or a
lion attacks a panther, a bull, or a deer.[1922] Again, the interior of
a B.F. kylix is sometimes filled with an animal subject, such as a
wounded stag,[1923] or a deer scratching itself or grazing,[1924] or
other animals[1925]; and in a similar position on one R.F. kylix we
have an ass with its pack.[1926] Other animal subjects worth mentioning
are a sea-serpent,[1927] goats browsing on vines,[1928] a fox caught in
a trap,[1929] cats and mice,[1930] the appearance of the swallow.[1931]

There is a class of ware made in Southern Italy which takes the form of
flat plates or dishes, decorated with representations of fish and
molluscs, such as the pike or mullet, the cuttle-fish and various
shell-fish; these were clearly used for eating fish off, and they have
in the centre a hollow to receive the sauce.[1932] Friezes of fish are
not infrequently found on the vases of Apulia. Animals, especially
birds, sometimes appear in friezes on the early Ionic vases, such as
geese, quails, or guinea-fowl[1933]; cocks and hens confronted are more
common, especially in the B.F. period,[1934] and one late Italian vase
has an amusing group of a cock and goose greeting one another with the
words, “Ah, the goose!” “Oh, the cock!”[1935]

Lastly, of subjects from still life, distinct from their appearance in
figure subjects, we find the armour of a warrior,[1936] a
washing-basin,[1937] a flute-case,[1938] a lyre,[1939] a table with
bread upon it,[1940] and a collection of objects for the toilet.[1941]

-----

Footnote 1112:

  Athens 1259 = Reinach, i. 506; _Mon. Grecs_, 1876, pls. 1–2.

Footnote 1113:

  B. M. F 68.

Footnote 1114:

  Reinach, ii. 186.

Footnote 1115:

  Petersburg 2188 = Reinach, i. 8; Reinach, i. 279 (= Baumeister, i. p.
  635, fig. 706) and 380. In _Ant. Denkm._ i. 59 (now at Boston) and in
  Berlin 2430 they do not appear in this connection.

Footnote 1116:

  B.M. B 170; Helbig, 78 = Reinach, i. 96 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1888, pl. 6,
  1 (Exekias).

Footnote 1117:

  Millin-Reinach, ii. 44 (doubtful; perhaps Zethos and Amphion).

Footnote 1118:

  Petersburg 1924 and 1929 = Reinach, i. 9.

Footnote 1119:

  Reinach, i. 244.

Footnote 1120:

  _Ibid._ i. 363.

Footnote 1121:

  B.M. E 696.

Footnote 1122:

  François vase; Reinach, i. 230, ii. 119.

Footnote 1123:

  Reinach, i. 361 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pls. 38–39.

Footnote 1124:

  Bibl. Nat. 442 = Reinach, ii. 79 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1889, 12, 5.

Footnote 1125:

  Jatta 1095 = Reinach, i. 119 (Phineus scene); Reinach, i. 226 (in
  Louvre).

Footnote 1126:

  Reinach, i. 231, 507 (= Athens 853), ii. 1: see generally Roscher’s
  _Lexikon_, _s.v._ Leukippiden.

Footnote 1127:

  B.M. E 224 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pls. 8–9; probably
  influenced by the painting by Polygnotos of this subject (see Vol. I.
  p. 443).

Footnote 1128:

  Reinach, i. 484: cf. Bibl. Nat. 388.

Footnote 1129:

  B.M. B 633 = _Wiener Vorl._ iv. 9, 3.

Footnote 1130:

  Inghirami, _Vasi Fitt._ ii. 187: cf. Reinach, i. 361 (rev. of vase).

Footnote 1131:

  See p. 19.

Footnote 1132:

  B.M. F 479; Reinach, i. 229; _Gaz. Arch._ 1875, pl. 14 (in Louvre).

Footnote 1133:

  B.M. F 107.

Footnote 1134:

  Munich 611 and 291 = Reinach, i. 419, ii. 47.

Footnote 1135:

  Munich 371 = _Ber. d. sächs. Gesellsch._ 1853, pl. 10, 1, p. 145. He
  is represented as attacking Linos, who had found fault with his
  playing.

Footnote 1136:

  Reinach, i. 326 (Iphikles here with Linos).

Footnote 1137:

  See _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, ii. p. 13.

Footnote 1138:

  Reinach, ii. 70.

Footnote 1139:

  Furtwaengler, however, thinks the subject is Herakles sacrificing a
  bull (_Gr. Vasenmalerei_, p. 16: see below, p. 106).

Footnote 1140:

  Cf. Paus. v. 19, 1: t?e?? ??d?e? ???????? p??se??µe???.

Footnote 1141:

  See p. 106.

Footnote 1142:

  _Isthm._ iii. 90.

Footnote 1143:

  B.F.: B.M. B 196, B 322; Munich 3 = Reinach, ii. 62; an early
  Athenian example in _J.H.S._ xxii. pl. 2. R.F.: Reinach, i. 242 =
  _Wiener Vorl._ v. 4 = Louvre G 103 (Euphronios); Athens 1166. See
  also Vienna 322 = Reinach, i. 339 and Munich 605 = _Ber. d. sächs.
  Gesellsch._ 1853, pl. 8, fig. 1.

Footnote 1144:

  B.M. B 314; Berlin 2057; Louvre F 208 = Reinach, i. 452; Munich 1180
  = Reinach, i. 255, 2, and Helbig, 228 = _Ber. d. sächs. Gesellsch._
  1853, pls. 5, fig. 2, and 8, fig. 2; Reinach, i. 255, 1 = Baumeister,
  i. p. 49, fig. 56; Reinach, i. 451. The only R.F. examples published
  are Munich 401 (= Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 32) and 605 (=
  _Ber. d. sächs. Gesellsch._ 1853, pl. 7, fig. 1).

Footnote 1145:

  See above, p. 72.

Footnote 1146:

  Bibl. Nat. 322.

Footnote 1147:

  Cambridge 43: cf. Pind. _Nem._ iv. 46.

Footnote 1148:

  _J.H.S._ xiii. pp. 71–2.

Footnote 1149:

  B.F.: B.M. B 197, B 364 (= _Wiener Vorl._ 1890–91, pl. 6, 1,
  Nikosthenes); Berlin 1732 = Reinach, ii. 66 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1889, 1,
  2 (Kolchos). R.F.: B.M. E 73; Reinach, ii. 47, 68, 1 (?), and i. 223
  = _Wiener Vorl._ D. pl. 5 (Pamphaios).

Footnote 1150:

  Jatta 1088 = Reinach, i. 475 = _Wiener Vorl._ iii. 4: see _Röm.
  Mitth._ 1894, p. 285.

Footnote 1151:

  _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1898, p. 51 (vase in Boston).

Footnote 1152:

  B.F.: B.M. B 228, B 313; Berlin 1851–52. R.F.: Munich 251 = Reinach,
  i. 259.

Footnote 1153:

  B.M. E 437 = Reinach, ii. 62 = _Wiener Vorl._ D. 6, 2.

Footnote 1154:

  B.F.: B.M. B 223, B 311; Berlin 1906; Louvre F 38 = _Wiener Vorl._
  1889, pl. 5, fig. 3 (Timagoras); Reinach, i. 227. No good R.F.
  examples (see Reinach, i. 346).

Footnote 1155:

  B.F.: B.M. B 225; Bibl. Nat. 255 = Reinach, ii. 61. R.F.: B.M. E 162;
  Athens 1202 = Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ pl. 32, 4.

Footnote 1156:

  Reinach, i. 339 (R.F.).

Footnote 1157:

  B.M. B 226; Helbig, 27; Reinach, ii. 64 (one = Bologna 195). R.F.:
  Reinach, i. 221 and i. 41 (= Petersburg 1272, curious).

Footnote 1158:

  B.F.: _Amer. Journ. of Arch._ 1900, pl. 6 (Proto-Corinthian);
  _J.H.S._ i. pl. 1; Berlin 336 (= Reinach, i. 448), 1670 (= _ibid._
  ii. 64, 1), 1737. R.F.: Reinach, i. 221. Late: B.M. F 43;
  Millin-Reinach, i. 68.

Footnote 1159:

  Petersburg 1787 = Reinach, i. 40.

Footnote 1160:

  B.F.: B.M. B 30; Berlin 1702; Helbig, 5; Athens 657 = _Ant. Denkm._
  i. 57; Louvre E 852 = Reinach, i. 156. R.F.: B.M. E 42, E 176;
  _Boston Mus. Report_ for 1900, p. 49, No. 17 (Aristophanes and
  Erginos).

Footnote 1161:

  _Mon. Antichi_, ix. pl. 3 (in B.M.); Naples 3089 = _ibid._ p. 10 =
  Millingen-Reinach, 33.

Footnote 1162:

  Berlin 1722; Reinach, i. 388.

Footnote 1163:

  Louvre F 60.

Footnote 1164:

  Oxford 249; Berlin 766–67; Munich 783; Reinach, ii. 59, 10. Late
  R.F.: Berlin 2359. Parody: Schreiber-Anderson, pl. 5, 2 = _Jahrbuch_,
  i. p. 280.

Footnote 1165:

  Bibl. Nat. 393 = Reinach, i. 397.

Footnote 1166:

  B.F.: Vienna 217 = Reinach, i. 169 (Caeretan hydria). R.F.: B.M. E
  38; Athens 1175 = Dumont-Pottier, i. pl. 18; Berlin 2534. See
  Hartwig, _Meistersch._ p. 53, note 1.

Footnote 1167:

  B.M. E 364; Reinach, i. 229, 338, 392.

Footnote 1168:

  Berlin 4027 = Reinach, i. 338: cf. Aelian, _Var. Hist._ i. 24.

Footnote 1169:

  Reinach, i. 384, and see i. 475 and ii. p. 423; Louvre E 633 (capture
  of heralds): see for the myth, Paus. ix. 17, 2, ix. 25, 4; Diod. Sic.
  iv. 10; Apollod. ii. 4, 11.

Footnote 1170:

  Athens 970.

Footnote 1171:

  Berlin 1927 (?); B.M. E 290.

Footnote 1172:

  _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1895, p. 37 (R.F. in Berlin).

Footnote 1173:

  Bibl. Nat. 174.

Footnote 1174:

  _Boston Mus. Report_ for 1898, No. 33.

Footnote 1175:

  B.F.: B.M. B 195, B 316; Bibl. Nat. 251 = Reinach, ii. 252. R.F.:
  B.M. E 255 (= Hoppin, _Euthymides_, pl. 5); E 318, E 458; Berlin 2159
  = Wernicke-Graef, _Ant. Denkm._ pl. 27, fig. 3; Munich 401 =
  Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 32 (Phintias); Reinach, i. 224. Late:
  Naples 1762 = Millingen-Reinach, 30.

Footnote 1176:

  Stackelberg, pl. 15.

Footnote 1177:

  Munich 1294 = Reinach, i. 403; _ibid._ ii. 4 = _Wiener Vorl._ ii. 8.

Footnote 1178:

  B.M. B 57.

Footnote 1179:

  Cambridge 100; and see _J.H.S._ xix. pl. 9.

Footnote 1180:

  Helbig, 232 = Reinach, ii. 59; a B.F. example in _Röm. Mitth._ 1902,
  pl. 5.

Footnote 1181:

  B.M. E 65 = Reinach, i. 193.

Footnote 1182:

  B.M. F 494; Berlin 3291; heads of Herakles and Omphale, Bibl. Nat.
  866.

Footnote 1183:

  Louvre E 635 = Reinach, i. 151 = Rayet and Collignon, pl. 6; _Mon.
  Grecs_, 21–2 (1893–94), pl. 14 (in Louvre).

Footnote 1184:

  B.M. B 165; Athens 477 = Reinach, i. 519 (Melian vase): see note 1186
  below.

Footnote 1185:

  _J.H.S._ xii. pl. 19; _Jahreshefte_, 1900, p. 64. The slaying of
  Iphitos is represented on a white-ground cup in the Louvre,
  _Monuments Piot_, ii. p. 53.

Footnote 1186:

  Athens 477, according to Pottier in _Revue des Études Grecques_,
  1895, p. 389.

Footnote 1187:

  _Anzeiger_, 1891, p. 119 (in Berlin); a burlesque of the subject is
  given in Fig. 105, Vol. I. p. 474.

Footnote 1188:

  Millin-Reinach, ii. 71.

Footnote 1189:

  Reinach, ii. 75.

Footnote 1190:

  Fig. 107, Vol. I. p. 480.

Footnote 1191:

  Oxford 322; Reinach, ii. 62 = Roscher, iii. p. 762.

Footnote 1192:

  Naples 3359 = Reinach, i. 400; and see note 1186.

Footnote 1193:

  B.M. F 68.

Footnote 1194:

  Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 38, p. 422.

Footnote 1195:

  Bibl. Nat. 822 = Millin-Reinach, ii. 10; _Ber. d. sächs. Gesellsch._
  1855, pls. 1–2. See above, p. 67.

Footnote 1196:

  Reinach, i. 226.

Footnote 1197:

  Berlin 2164: cf. Athens 1119 = _Ath. Mitth._ 1901, pp. 146, 149.

Footnote 1198:

  B.M. B 473; Berlin 1856, 1919.

Footnote 1199:

  Berlin 3256 (Argonautic?).

Footnote 1200:

  B.M. E 494 (? see p. 106, note 1216); Reinach, ii. 180 =
  Millingen-Reinach, 51. On Chryse see _Class. Review_, 1888, p. 123;
  the same figure occurs on the B.M. vase E 224 in connection with the
  rape of the Leukippidae.

Footnote 1201:

  B.M. E 505: cf. for statue B.M. F 233.

Footnote 1202:

  Jatta 423 = Reinach, i. 205.

Footnote 1203:

  Millin-Reinach, ii. 25.

Footnote 1204:

  Reinach; i. 257; and cf. B.M. F 211, F 278 for H. at Olympia; also
  Stackelberg, pl. 42.

Footnote 1205:

  B.M. B 198, B 498; Reinach, ii. 74–5; Louvre F 116–117 = Reinach, i.
  297 (Nikosthenes); Helbig, 93 = _Mus. Greg._ ii. 54, 2.

Footnote 1206:

  B.M. D 14; Munich 369 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 24 (Duris);
  Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ 42, 4; Reinach, ii. 298.

Footnote 1207:

  B.M. B 301, B 497, E 66; Berlin 1961 = Reinach, ii. 43; Berlin 2534
  (with Seilenos); Munich 388 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 4 (B.F.
  and R.F. “bilingual”); Reinach. ii. 39; Millin-Reinach, i. 37; Athens
  764 = Heydemann, _Gr. Vasenb._ pl. 3, 1.

Footnote 1208:

  B.M. B 167.

Footnote 1209:

  Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ pl. 44 (in Petersburg).

Footnote 1210:

  Reinach, ii. 318; Helbig, ii. p. 327 = Millingen-Reinach, 35;
  _Philologus_, 1868, pl. 2.

Footnote 1211:

  B.M. B 229: cf. Berlin 4027 and B.M. E 814.

Footnote 1212:

  _Él. Cér._ iii. 14.

Footnote 1213:

  Berlin 2293, 3988; Petersburg 523 = Reinach, i. 467; _Él. Cér._ i. 1;
  _Mon. Grecs_, 1875, pl. 1.

Footnote 1214:

  B.M. B 147; Reinach, ii. 21.

Footnote 1215:

  B.M. B 228; Berlin 1857; Helbig, 25; Reinach, ii. 43: cf. Athens 791
  = Heydemann, _Gr. Vasenb._ pl. 3, 2.

Footnote 1216:

  See B.M. E 494; _J.H.S._ xviii. p. 275; Roscher, _Lexikon_, i. p.
  2235; Bacchylides, _Od._ 16; also p. 96, note 1211.

Footnote 1217:

  B.M. E 370.

Footnote 1218:

  Munich 384 = Reinach, i. 130 = Baumeister, i. p. 307, fig. 322;
  Reinach, i. 481.

Footnote 1219:

  B.F.: B.M. B 199–201, 211 (Pl. XXIX.), 230, 317–21; Reinach, ii. 72;
  Oxford 212 (no deities). R.F.: Helbig, 230 (A. about to mount
  chariot).

Footnote 1220:

  Bibl. Nat. 253 = Reinach, i. 399 and 254.

Footnote 1221:

  Berlin 1827 = Reinach, ii. 74; Reinach, ii. 161.

Footnote 1222:

  With Athena: B.M. F 238; Millingen-Reinach, 36. With Nike: B.M. F 64,
  F 102; Reinach, i. 368, 481, and ii. 204; _Wiener Vorl._ E. pls. 7,
  8, fig. 3 = _Mon. Grecs_, 1876, pl. 3 (in Louvre; parody; chariot
  drawn by Centaurs).

Footnote 1223:

  B.F.: B.M. B 166, B 379, B 424; Berlin 1691, 1857; Reinach, i. 359,
  1, ii. 76 (in Berlin). R.F.: B.M. E 262 = Reinach, ii. 75; Berlin
  2278 = Reinach, i. 70 = _Ant. Denkm._ i. 9 (Sosias); Furtwaengler and
  Reichhold, pl. 20; Reinach, i. 222, 408 (Fig. 127). Late: Naples 2408
  = Reinach, i. 323; Petersburg 1775 = Reinach, i. 302 (parody).

Footnote 1224:

  B.F.: Louvre F 30 = _Rev. Arch._ xiii. (1889), pl. 4 (Amasis); F
  116–117 = Reinach, i. 297 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1890–91, pl. 4, figs. 1–2
  (Nikosthenes); Bibl. Nat. 254; Berlin 1961 = Reinach, ii. 43. R.F.:
  Berlin 2626; Reinach, ii. 76, 186.

Footnote 1225:

  B.M. E 262; Bonn 720 = _Jahrbuch_, 1892, p. 69; Athens 1346 =
  Dumont-Pottier, i. pl. 15; B.M. F 178; Reinach, i. 251 (all R.F. or
  late).

Footnote 1226:

  B.M. E 244; Berlin 3257; _Forman Sale Cat._ 364: see p. 77.

Footnote 1227:

  Berlin 2538 = Reinach, ii. 162.

Footnote 1228:

  B.M. E 264 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1890–91, 8, 1; a similar vase in _Röm.
  Mitth._ 1894, pl. 8, has been otherwise interpreted (see below, p.
  110, note 1233).

Footnote 1229:

  Petersburg 830 = Reinach, i. 150 = _Wiener Vorl._ A. 8 (Hieron).

Footnote 1230:

  See on the subject generally _Museo Ital._ iii. p. 235.

Footnote 1231:

  _Gaz. Arch._ 1884, pls. 44–6.

Footnote 1232:

  _Wiener Vorl._ E. 12, 2.

Footnote 1233:

  See _J.H.S._ xviii. pl. 14, and pp. 277–79 for three other instances;
  the last, however, is susceptible of other interpretations.

Footnote 1234:

  Bologna 273 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1999, fig. 2149. The B.M. vase E
  264 (see p. 108, note 1228) _may_ have the same meaning, in which
  case the woman holding the clue is a sort of “short-hand” allusion to
  the adventure awaiting him. See also Reinach, ii. 81 (Theseus
  receiving libation from Aithra).

Footnote 1235:

  B.M. E 41 = Reinach, i. 532 (Chachrylion).

Footnote 1236:

  Berlin 2179 = _Wiener Vorl._ iii. 6; Reinach, i. 222 = Plate XXXIX.
  (also interpreted as Peleus and Thetis, see p. 120); Harrison and
  Verrall, p. cxxxi (in Vienna): see also _Boston Mus. Report_ for
  1900, p. 67, No. 25.

Footnote 1237:

  Reinach, i. 91; ii. 264 (= Bibl. Nat. 421).

Footnote 1238:

  Munich 7; B.M. E 41; Reinach, i. 87.

Footnote 1239:

  B.M. E 157, 272, 450; Reinach, ii. 163 (now in B.M.; a complete and
  magnificent example); Millin-Reinach, i. 10; Naples 2421, 3253, and
  R.C. 239 = Reinach, ii. 278, i. 330, i. 482 (the first of these given
  by Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pls. 26–8).

Footnote 1240:

  B.M. F 272; Munich 368 = Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pls. 59, 60, and 805
  = Reinach, i. 391; Reinach, ii. 181–82; _Boston Mus. Report_ for
  1900, p. 50, No. 17 (Erginos and Aristophanes); and see under
  Centaurs, p. 145.

Footnote 1241:

  Munich 410 = Reinach, ii. 86 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 33.

Footnote 1242:

  Berlin 1731 = Roscher, iii. p. 1782, has been interpreted as the rape
  of Helene.

Footnote 1243:

  See Furtwaengler, _op. cit._ p. 177; and cf. Bibl. Nat. 256 =
  Reinach, ii. 254. Berlin 3143 = Reinach, i. 373, may also represent a
  rape by Theseus.

Footnote 1244:

  Jatta 1094 = Reinach, i. 356: see also Reinach, i. 108, 455, and
  above, p. 68.

Footnote 1245:

  Munich 849 = Reinach, i. 258.

Footnote 1246:

  _Ant. Denkm._ i. 59 (in Boston).

Footnote 1247:

  See B.M. F 123 and F 272; also a vase in Berlin (_Arch. Anzeiger_,
  1890, p. 89), where Eros shoots with his bow at Phaidra; Hippolytos
  is present. Cf. also Naples 2900 = Millingen-Reinach, 41.

Footnote 1248:

  B.M. F 279.

Footnote 1249:

  Petersburg 1357 = Reinach, i. 244, and 1723 = Baumeister, i. p. 406,
  fig. 448; Naples 3140 = _Mus. Borb._ ii. 30, 4; _Monuments Piot_, x.
  pl. 8 (in Boston); and cf. Berlin 2300 = Reinach, i. 273.

Footnote 1250:

  B.M. B 155, F 490 (?).

Footnote 1251:

  B.M. F 83.

Footnote 1252:

  Athens 1956 = _Ath. Mitth._ xi. (1886), pl. 10.

Footnote 1253:

  B.M. B 471 = Fig. 97, Vol. I. p. 382; Berlin 3022 = Reinach, i. 172;
  Munich 1187 = Reinach, ii. 109: cf. Bibl. Nat. 456.

Footnote 1254:

  B.M. B 248, B 380; E 181, E 399; F 500; Berlin 1682 = Reinach, i.
  441; Bibl. Nat. 277 = Reinach, i. 290; Munich 619 = Reinach, ii. 48.

Footnote 1255:

  B.M. E 493; _Mon. Grecs_, 1878, pl. 2 (a fine example in the Louvre).

Footnote 1256:

  Munich 619, 910 = Reinach, ii. 48–9; _Ant. Denkm._ i. 57. For
  Chrysaor see Reinach, i. 172 (Louvre E 857), ii. 49, and Stackelberg,
  39.

Footnote 1257:

  Millin-Reinach, ii. 4.

Footnote 1258:

  B.M. E 169 = _J.H.S._ xxiv. pl. 5, and F 185; Engelmann, _Arch.
  Studien_, p. 6; and cf. Naples 3225; Millin-Reinach, ii. 3;
  _Jahrbuch_, xi. (1896), pl. 2 (in Berlin). For the correct
  explanation of the first-named vase see Petersen in _op. cit._ p. 104
  ff.

Footnote 1259:

  Berlin 1652 = Reinach, i. 217; Roscher, iii. p. 2053 (in Berlin; a
  fine instance); Naples 3225, S.A. 24, S.A. 708 = Reinach, i. 188.

Footnote 1260:

  Reinach, i. 344; _Jahrbuch_, vii. (1892), p. 38: cf. _Philologus_,
  1868, pl. 1, fig. 1, and pl. 3.

Footnote 1261:

  Millingen-Reinach, 3: see _Philologus_, 1868, pl. 1, figs. 2–3, p. 16.

Footnote 1262:

  Berlin 2377 = Reinach, i. 289.

Footnote 1263:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1892, p. 33.

Footnote 1264:

  Naples 2202 = Dubois-Maisonneuve, _Introd._ pl. 46; Reinach, i. 284.

Footnote 1265:

  B.M. E 610, E 715 (Plate XLVI., fig. 4).

Footnote 1266:

  B.M. B 2: cf. Bibl. Nat. 977 for a similar figure inaccurately (?)
  inscribed Oinomaos.

Footnote 1267:

  B.M. F 331; Naples 1982 = Reinach, i. 292 (very doubtful; Oinomaos
  absent: see p. 123, note 1361).

Footnote 1268:

  B.M. F 271, 278; Naples 2200 = Reinach, i. 379; Athens 968 =
  _Jahrbuch_, 1891, p. 34 (B.F.); Reinach, i. 290 = _Wiener Vorl._ i.
  pl. 10, 2; Naples 2858 = _ibid._ pl. 10, 1 (subject doubtful).

Footnote 1269:

  Naples 3255 = Reinach, i. 235; Reinach, i. 163 = Baumeister, ii. p.
  1203, fig. 1395; Naples S.A. 697.

Footnote 1270:

  Berlin 3072 = Reinach, i. 204.

Footnote 1271:

  Naples 2200 = Reinach, i. 379.

Footnote 1272:

  Naples 3222 = Reinach, i. 167.

Footnote 1273:

  Jatta 1499 = Reinach, i. 127 = _Wiener Vorl._ viii. 8; _Boston Mus.
  Report_, 1900, p. 68, No. 25.

Footnote 1274:

  Naples 2418 = Dubois-Maisonneuve, _Introd._ pl. 69; _Wiener Vorl._
  viii. 9, 1 = Roscher, ii. 282; Reinach, i. 287, ii. 318.

Footnote 1275:

  _Amer. Journ. of Arch._ 1900, pl. 4; Louvre A 478; Reinach, i. 108
  (Karlsruhe 388), 517 (Athens 1589), 331 (four late examples), and ii.
  279; and see B.M. B 105, B 162; Naples 3253 = Reinach, i. 195; Berlin
  3258.

Footnote 1276:

  Petersburg 427 = Inghirami, _Vasi Fitt._ 3 (see Vol. I. p. 478 and
  _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1874, p. 35).

Footnote 1277:

  Baumeister, i. p. 303, fig. 319; and see Reinach, i. 331, and Munich
  805 = _ibid._ i. 277 (the latter so interpreted by Flasch, _Angebl.
  Argonautenbilder_, p. 30 ff.).

Footnote 1278:

  B.F.: François vase; Munich 333 = Reinach, ii. 119 = _Wiener Vorl._
  1889, 2, 2; Berlin 1705; Helbig, 34 = _Mus. Greg._ ii. 90; Reinach,
  i. 230. R.F.: Reinach, ii. 162, 210.

Footnote 1279:

  Roscher, iii. p. 1811.

Footnote 1280:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 37 (Plate XXI.), F 154; Vienna 217 = Reinach, i. 170.
  See also p. 166.

Footnote 1281:

  Naples S.A. 11 = Reinach, i. 401.

Footnote 1282:

  Naples 3412 = Reinach, i. 498 = _Wiener Vorl._ B. 2, 1 (Assteas;
  Phrixos also on ram); Reinach, ii. 309. For Phrixos on ram see Berlin
  3345, and _Festschr. für Overbeck_, p. 17.

Footnote 1283:

  _Tyszkiewicz Coll._ pl. 12 (the antiquity of this vase is very
  questionable).

Footnote 1284:

  Naples S.A. 270 = Reinach, i. 319.

Footnote 1285:

  Reinach, i. 226, 1–3: see _Festschrift für O. Benndorf_, p. 67 and p.
  133, note 5.

Footnote 1286:

  See p. 81.

Footnote 1287:

  Ionic cup in Würzburg, Reinach, i. 201 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold,
  pl. 41; B.M. E 302; Jatta 1095 = Reinach, i. 119; Stackelberg, pl. 38
  = Millingen, _Anc. Uned. Mon._ i. 15; and see Berlin 1682.

Footnote 1288:

  Bibl. Nat. 442 = Reinach, ii. 79 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1889, 12, 5.

Footnote 1289:

  _J.H.S._ x. p. 118 = Reinach, i. 226.

Footnote 1290:

  Millingen-Reinach, 51 = Reinach, ii. 180: see above, p. 105.

Footnote 1291:

  Munich 805 = Reinach, i. 277 = _Wiener Vorl._ iv. 3; but see Flasch,
  _Angebl. Argonautenb._ p. 30 ff., and p. 137 (Laertes and Antikleia).

Footnote 1292:

  Petersburg 422 = Reinach, i. 139; Baumeister, i. p. 123, fig. 128;
  Millingen-Reinach, 6.

Footnote 1293:

  Helbig, ii. p. 328 = Reinach, i. 102 = Baumeister, i. p. 124, fig.
  129; Reinach, i. 137; but see Flasch, _Angebl. Argonautenb._ p. 24 ff.

Footnote 1294:

  Naples 2413 = Roscher, ii. 81, and 3252 = Reinach, i. 449.

Footnote 1295:

  Naples 3248 = Roscher, ii. 83.

Footnote 1296:

  Millingen-Reinach, 7 = _Wiener Vorl._ ii. 8.

Footnote 1297:

  Jatta 1501 = Reinach, i. 361 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pls. 38–39.

Footnote 1298:

  Helbig, 179 = Reinach, i. 359 (ram led to caldron). B.M. B 221, B
  328; Berlin 2188; Reinach, ii. 81 (ram placed in caldron; daughters
  of Pelias usually present).

Footnote 1299:

  Reinach, i. 336; _ibid._ 359 = Helbig 179 (P. led to slaughter by
  daughters; M. waiting with knife).

Footnote 1300:

  B.M. E 163 (J. as old man; ram in caldron).

Footnote 1301:

  Naples S.A. 526.

Footnote 1302:

  Munich 810 = Reinach, i. 363 = Baumeister, ii. p. 903, fig. 980;
  Reinach, i. 402.

Footnote 1303:

  Naples 3221 = Reinach, i. 402.

Footnote 1304:

  Bologna 273 = Baumeister, iii. 1999, fig. 2149.

Footnote 1305:

  B.M. E 224.

Footnote 1306:

  Cf. the poem by Stesichoros, ?thla ?p? Pel?a

Footnote 1307:

  Berlin 1655 = Reinach, i. 199: see Vol. I. p. 319.

Footnote 1308:

  _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ xxiii. p. 158; but see _Burlington Fine Arts
  Club Cat._ (1903), p. 92, for another explanation; also p. 47.

Footnote 1309:

  The only literary source for these stories (before Roman times) is in
  the tragic poets. But subjects from the _Septem_ of Aeschylus are not
  found on vases; and it is not until the Hellenistic period that any
  real references to the Sophoclean and Euripidean plays occur. On some
  of the Megarian bowls (Vol. I. p. 500) the subjects adhere very
  closely to the text.

Footnote 1310:

  B.M. E 81; Petersburg 2189 = Reinach, i. 5.

Footnote 1311:

  B.M. B 505–6.

Footnote 1312:

  Louvre E 669 = Reinach, i. 435, 1; Berlin 2634 = _Wiener Vorl._ i. 7
  = Roscher, ii. 837; Naples 3226 = Millingen, _Anc. Uned. Mon._ i. pl.
  27 (Assteas); Millin-Reinach, ii. 7 (in Louvre); _Röm. Mitth._ v.
  (1890), p. 343.

Footnote 1313:

  Athens 1858 = Reinach, i. 396: see p. 155, note 1548, for another
  interpretation; also _Arch. Zeit._ 1865, p. 68, and Frazer,
  _Pausanias_, v. p. 49.

Footnote 1314:

  _Wiener Vorl._ C. 7, 3 = Roscher, ii. 842.

Footnote 1315:

  Berlin 3296 = Reinach, i. 421 = Baumeister, i. p. 456, fig. 502. The
  vase given in Millin-Reinach, ii. 44, may represent Zethos and
  Amphion with Antiope.

Footnote 1316:

  Reinach, i. 379.

Footnote 1317:

  Berlin 3239; Naples 1769; _Wiener Vorl._ vi. 11 = Roscher, i. p. 903.

Footnote 1318:

  Bibl. Nat. 372 = Reinach, i. 92 = Baumeister, ii. p. 1049, fig. 1266.

Footnote 1319:

  B.M. E 696 = _J.H.S._ viii. pl. 81.

Footnote 1320:

  B.F.: B.M. B 539; Stackelberg, pl. 16. R.F.: B.M. E 156; Vienna 336 =
  Reinach, i. 177; _J.H.S._ xxiv. p. 314 (Oxford); Helbig, 186 =
  Hartwig, _Meistersch_. pl. 73. See also parodies in _Philologus_,
  1897, pl. 1 (in Boston), and _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1891, p. 119 (Berlin).

Footnote 1321:

  See p. 147; _q.v._ also for Sphinx seizing Theban youth.

Footnote 1322:

  _Wiener Vorl._ 1889, 9, 6.

Footnote 1323:

  _Ibid._ pl. 8, 8 = Reinach, i. 376: see Roscher, iii. p. 736.

Footnote 1324:

  Naples 2868 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1889, 9, 10. See also Chapter XVII.

Footnote 1325:

  B.F.: Berlin 1655 = Reinach, i. 199 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1889, 10;
  Kopenhagen 112 = Millingen-Reinach, 20; _J.H.S._ xviii. pl. 16 (?);
  Roscher, i. p. 295. R.F.: Munich 151 = Overbeck, _op. cit._ iii. 5;
  Petersburg 1650 = Reinach, i. 120, and 406 = _ibid._ i. 480.

Footnote 1326:

  B.M. B 247; Berlin 1712.

Footnote 1327:

  Millingen-Reinach, 20.

Footnote 1328:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1899, p. 361.

Footnote 1329:

  Berlin 2395 = Reinach, i. 461: see _Arch. Zeit._ 1881, p. 258.

Footnote 1330:

  Athens 960 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1889, 11, 8.

Footnote 1331:

  _Jahrbuch_, viii. (1893), pl. 1: see Thiersch, _Tyrrhen. Amphoren_,
  p. 56.

Footnote 1332:

  B.M. D 7; Petersburg 523 = Reinach, i. 466 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1889, 11,
  1.

Footnote 1333:

  Naples 3255 = Reinach, i. 235 = Baumeister, i. p. 114, fig. 120;
  perhaps also Millin-Reinach, ii. 37 (Lasimos in Louvre).

Footnote 1334:

  Munich 144: cf. Naples 1766 = Overbeck, _Her. Bildw._ pl. 4, 4; and
  see Reinach, ii. 284, Roscher, i. p. 296, and Stat. _Theb._ v. 699 ff.

Footnote 1335:

  Kopenhagen 64 = Reinach, i. 259 = Baumeister, i. p. 17, fig. 19.

Footnote 1336:

  Louvre E 640 = Reinach, i. 147 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1889, 11, 4;
  Millingen-Reinach, 22 (?).

Footnote 1337:

  Petersburg 452 = Reinach, i. 161 = _Wiener Vorl._ iii. 3.

Footnote 1338:

  _J.H.S._ xviii. pl. 17, 1 (?).

Footnote 1339:

  Jatta 423 and Berlin 3240 = Reinach, i. 205, 409 = _Wiener Vorl._
  1889, pl. 9, figs. 14, 12; B.M. F 175 (?): see also Jatta 414 =
  Reinach, i. 467 = _Wiener Vorl._ B. 4, 2.

Footnote 1340:

  Reinach, i. 273.

Footnote 1341:

  Petersburg 2188 = Reinach, i. 8; Berlin 2430 = _ibid._ i. 287 (Helen
  coming forth); Reinach, i. 279 (= Baumeister, i. p. 635, fig. 706)
  and 380; Micali, _Mon. Ined._ 38; _Ant. Denkm._ i. 59 (in Boston).
  For the various versions of the myth see Roscher, _s.v._ Helena.

Footnote 1342:

  _Boston Mus. Report_ for 1900, p. 70, No. 27; and cf. Reinach, i. 173.

Footnote 1343:

  For a collected list of all vase-paintings connected with this story
  see _Jahrbuch_, i. (1886), p. 201 ff.

Footnote 1344:

  B.M. E 647; Munich 807 = Millingen-Reinach, 4; Louvre E 639 =
  _Jahrbuch_, 1886, pl. 10, 1; Reinach, ii. 91; and see _ibid._ i. 222
  = Plate XXXIX. (otherwise interpreted, p. 111).

Footnote 1345:

  B.F.: B.M. B 215 (Fig. 128); Munich 380 = Reinach, ii. 115 =
  Baumeister, iii. p. 1799, fig. 1882. R.F.: B.M. E 424; Berlin 2279 =
  Baumeister, iii. p. 1797, fig. 1881 (Peithinos); Athens 1202 =
  Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ 32, 4; Athens 1588 = $1$2 1897, pl.
  9; Munich 369 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 24 (Duris); Overbeck,
  _Her. Bildw._ pl. 7, fig. 8 (in Vatican).

Footnote 1346:

  B.M. E 9, E 73; and see above, pp. 25, 26.

Footnote 1347:

  Palermo 1503 = Overbeck, _Her. Bildw._ pl. 8, fig. 6: see also for
  Cheiron p. 146.

Footnote 1348:

  Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 1.

Footnote 1349:

  B.M. B 620; Berlin 4220; De Witte, _Coll. à  l’Hôtel Lambert_, pl. 1;
  Athens 966 (with Athena and Hermes); Louvre G 3 (Pamphaios); Micali,
  _Storia_, pl. 87; B.M. B 77 = Fig. 98 (parody).

Footnote 1350:

  Bibl. Nat. 538 = Reinach, i. 90 (doubtful); Jahn. _Arch. Beitr._ pl.
  11 (?), and see p. 352 ff.

Footnote 1351:

  Reinach, ii. 43.

Footnote 1352:

  Bibl. Nat. 1047 = Reinach, i. 87.

Footnote 1353:

  Reinach, i. 126 = Bibl. Nat. 422.

Footnote 1354:

  See _J.H.S._ vii. p. 196 ff., whence this classification is taken.

Footnote 1355:

  B.M. B 236–38; early Ionic vase in Munich, 123 = Furtwaengler and
  Reichhold, pl. 21; Overbeck, _Her. Bildw._ pl. 9, fig. 2 (Xenokles);
  _J.H.S._ vii. pl. 70, p. 198.

Footnote 1356:

  B.F.: B.M. B 312. R.F.: B.M. E 445; Berlin 2536 = Roscher, iii. p.
  1615.

Footnote 1357:

  B.F.: B.M. B 171; Munich 1269 = Overbeck, _op. cit._ 9, 6. R.F.:
  Berlin 2291 = Fig. 129 (Hieron); Reinach, i. 246 = Roscher, iii. p.
  1610 (Brygos, in Louvre); Roscher, iii. p. 1617 (fine pyxis in
  Kopenhagen; the goddesses in chariots).

Footnote 1358:

  Berlin 2633; Petersburg 1807 = Reinach, i. 7; B.M. F 109, F 167;
  Berlin 3240; Karlsruhe 259 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 30;
  _Ath. Mitth._ xxiv. (1899), p. 67 (R.F. kotyle in Berlin, Hermes
  omitted).

Footnote 1359:

  _Wiener Vorl._ E. 11 = _Jahrbuch_, ix. (1894), p. 252.

Footnote 1360:

  _Boston Mus. Report_ for 1899, No. 30, and 1901, p. 35 (both from the
  Kabeirion, Thebes).

Footnote 1361:

  B.M. F 175; Athens 1942 = Reinach, i. 402; Petersburg 1924 = Reinach,
  i. 9 = _Wiener Vorl._ C. 1, 3; Naples 1982 = Reinach, i. 292 (? See
  p. 113, note 1267); Reinach, i. 375.

Footnote 1362:

  B.M. E 226; Jatta 1619 = _Él. Cér._ iv. 72 = Roscher, i. 1961.

Footnote 1363:

  B.M. E 69 = _Wiener Vorl._ vi. 2; Berlin 2291 = Reinach, i. 437, 1 =
  Baumeister, i. p. 637, fig. 709 (Hieron); Petersburg 1929 = Reinach,
  i. 9; Reinach, i. 437, 2 (Hieron and Makron): see also _Rev. Arch._
  xxxiii. (1898), p. 399.

Footnote 1364:

  B.M. F 175 (?).

Footnote 1365:

  Millingen, _A.U.M._ i. 21 (fine R.F. vase in Louvre); _Röm. Mitth._
  ii. (1887), pls. 11–12, 4; Berlin 1737 = _Wiener Vorl._ B. 9, 4.

Footnote 1366:

  Naples 3352 = Reinach, i. 485; and see Bibl. Nat. 418 = Reinach, i.
  83; also Roscher, _s.v._ Nereus.

Footnote 1367:

  Reinach, i. 286 = Bibl. Nat. 851 = _Wiener Vorl._ B. 9, 2 (Epigenes).

Footnote 1368:

  Berlin 2264 (Oltos and Euxitheos) = _Wiener Vorl._ D. 2, 1; Bibl.
  Nat. 851 = Reinach, i. 287 = Roscher, iii. 295: see also Roscher,
  iii. 1697–99 (setting out of Patroklos). As Nestor himself went to
  the war, it is possible that this scene is to be regarded as taking
  place during and not before it.

Footnote 1369:

  Bologna 273 = _Wiener Vorl._ i. 4.

Footnote 1370:

  B.M. E 16; Baumeister, i. p. 683, fig. 743; and see Overbeck, _Her.
  Bildw._ pl. 13, 7, p. 276.

Footnote 1371:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1902, pl. 2 (in Boston).

Footnote 1372:

  _Iph. in Aul._ 192 ff.

Footnote 1373:

  B.M. B 193 (Plate XXXI.), B 211, E 10; Helbig, 78 = Reinach, i. 96 =
  _Wiener Vorl._ 1888, 6, 1 (Exekias). A “bilingual” example in Boston
  (by Andokides? B.F. and R.F.): see _Amer. Journ. of Arch._ 1896, pp.
  40–41, figs. 15–16. The latest example seems to be _Arch. Anzeiger_,
  1892, p. 102.

Footnote 1374:

  B.M. B 541, E 160: see below, p. 133, and _B.M. Cat._ iii. p 36.

Footnote 1375:

  B.M. F 159 = _Wiener Vorl._ v. 9, 3.

Footnote 1376:

  Reinach, i. 358 = Millingen-Reinach, 50; _ibid._ i. 145 = Baumeister,
  iii. p. 1326, fig. 1479; Milani, _Mito di Filottete_, frontispiece.

Footnote 1377:

  Bibl. Nat. 256 = Reinach, ii. 254: see p. 111, note 1243.

Footnote 1378:

  Petersburg 1793 = Reinach, i. 3: for a more probable interpretation
  (birth of Dionysos) see p. 19.

Footnote 1379:

  Dubois-Maisonneuve, _Introd._ pl. 63; Engelmann, _Arch. Stud. zu den
  Trag._ p. 17; and see Urlichs, _Beiträge_, pl. 4.

Footnote 1380:

  Petersburg 1275 = Reinach, i. 152: cf. Millingen, _Anc. Uned. Mon._
  i. pl. 22 (Overbeck, _Her. Bildw._ p. 296).

Footnote 1381:

  Overbeck, _Her. Bildw._ 13, 9.

Footnote 1382:

  B.M. E 382; Naples 2293 and R.C. 141 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1725, fig.
  1807.

Footnote 1383:

  _Boston Mus. Report_ for 1898, No. 40 (signed by Hieron).

Footnote 1384:

  B.M. B 153.

Footnote 1385:

  B.M. B 324, 542; _Forman Sale Cat._ 282 (= Reinach, i. 285, 1) and
  308 (both in B.M.); Athens 620 = Reinach, i. 394 = _Wiener Vorl._
  1888, 1, 1 (Timonidas); B.M. F 493 (caricature).

Footnote 1386:

  Louvre E 703 = Reinach, ii. 92 (early Ionic); B.M. B 307; François
  vase; Berlin 1685; Helbig, 130 = _Mus. Greg._ ii. 22, 1; B.M. E 10, E
  13, and _Forman Sale Cat._ 339.

Footnote 1387:

  Reinach, ii. 114–15 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1901, fig. 2000
  (Euphronios); Reinach, i. 285, 3; Louvre G 18 = Reinach, i. 203, 3;
  Louvre E 703 = Reinach, ii. 92; B.M. B 326.

Footnote 1388:

  Munich 124 = Reinach, ii. 113.

Footnote 1389:

  Berlin 2278 = _Ant. Denkm_. i. 10; and see Overbeck, _Her. Bildw._ p.
  297.

Footnote 1390:

  Reinach, ii. 198.

Footnote 1391:

  _Ibid._ i. 306 = _Wiener Vorl._ iii. 1 (the names may be fanciful);
  _ibid._ i. 77 (cf. Overbeck, _Her. Bildw._ p. 333).

Footnote 1392:

  Louvre E 609 = Reinach, i. 395 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1888, 1, 3 (Chares
  pyxis).

Footnote 1393:

  Like others of the Homeric scenes on B.F. vases, this type is
  sometimes used for an ordinary warrior taking leave of his family,
  and unless names are given it is difficult to distinguish.

Footnote 1394:

  Robert, in _Hermes_, 1901, p. 391, connects this scene with Book xix.
  320 ff.

Footnote 1395:

  The text is not exactly followed here. Menelaos kills Euphorbos in
  the _Iliad_, but does not fight over his body with Hector as he does
  on the vase. Possibly there is a confusion with the Patroklos episode
  below.

Footnote 1396:

  The “Psychostasia” is also referred to the combat of Achilles and
  Memnon (p. 132).

Footnote 1397:

  See, for a revised drawing of this vase, Hill, _Illustrations of
  School Classics_, p. 105.

Footnote 1398:

  B.M. B 209–10 (= _Wiener Vorl._ 1888, pl. 6, 2, 1889, pl. 3, 3 =
  Reinach, ii. 105), B 323 (?), E 280; Munich 478 = Reinach, ii. 105,
  and 370 = Furtwaengler-Reichhold, 6.

Footnote 1399:

  See below, p. 144.

Footnote 1400:

  _Boston Mus. Report_, 1903, No. 70: cf. Quint. Smyrn. i. 741 ff.

Footnote 1401:

  Overbeck, _Her. Bildw._ 21, 16 = Roscher, ii. 2674; and see B.M. B
  209 = Reinach, ii. 105.

Footnote 1402:

  Millingen, _A.U.M._ i. 4 = Engelmann-Anderson, _Atlas to Od._ iii. 15
  (? see above, under _Il._ xxii. 306 ff.); Reinach, ii. 105, 2.

Footnote 1403:

  B.F.: Berlin 1147; Helbig, 8, 31 = _Mus. Greg._ ii. 28, 1, and 38,
  1; Bibl. Nat. 207 = Reinach, ii. 254. R.F.: B.M. E 468;
  Millingen-Reinach, 49 = Reinach, i. 358; _Tyszkiewicz Coll._ pl. 17
  (now in Boston). In the last-named the subject is slightly varied.

Footnote 1404:

  B.M. E 12 = _Wiener Vorl._ D. 3, 1; Reinach, i. 149; Louvre F 388
  (?): see p. 71.

Footnote 1405:

  Millingen, _A.U.M._ i. 5; _Wiener Vorl._ vi. 7 = Roscher, i. p. 1265
  (in Louvre); Reinach, i. 347 = _Bourguignon Cat._ 19: cf. also Athens
  1093 = Roscher, ii. 2678 (Eos, together with Thanatos and Hypnos, two
  Keres).

Footnote 1406:

  Helbig, 43 = _Mus. Greg._ ii. 49, 2.

Footnote 1407:

  Reinach, ii. 106.

Footnote 1408:

  B.M. E 808 (?).

Footnote 1409:

  Reinach, i. 82.

Footnote 1410:

  B.M. B 172; Munich 380 = Reinach, ii. 115; Helbig, 77 = _ibid._ ii.
  107 (see below, p. 177); Bibl. Nat. 537 = Reinach, i. 90; _Boston
  Mus. Report_ for 1899, No. 28 = _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1898, p. 51.
  (Thetis present)

Footnote 1411:

  Louvre E 643 = Reinach, i. 311; _ibid._ ii. 107 (?).

Footnote 1412:

  B.M. B 240 = Reinach, ii. 99.

Footnote 1413:

  Reinach, i. 304 (and i. 226, 1–3 (?), see p. 115); Engelmann, _Arch.
  Stud. zu d. Trag._ p. 37: cf. _Sale Cat. Hôtel Drouot_, 11 May, 1903,
  No. 100.

Footnote 1414:

  Athens 475 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1955, fig. 2086 (Melian vase); B.M.
  B 327, B 397, E 13; _Forman Sale Cat._ 298; Berlin 2000 = Robert,
  _Bild u. Lied_, p. 217; Baumeister, i. p. 29, fig. 30; _Wiener Vorl._
  1889, 5, 2 (in Louvre); Naples 3358 = Reinach, i. 313 = _Wiener
  Vorl._ C. 8, 2. The type is derived from that of Herakles and Kyknos
  (p. 101).

Footnote 1415:

  B.M. E 69 = _Wiener Vorl._ vi. 2; Millin-Reinach, i. 66.

Footnote 1416:

  B.M. B 541, E 160: see above, p. 124.

Footnote 1417:

  Vienna 325 = Reinach, i. 174 = _Wiener Vorl._ vi. 1.

Footnote 1418:

  Two Corinthian vases, _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1891, p. 116, and _Boston
  Mus. Report_, 1899, No. 12; Louvre E 635 = Reinach, i. 151 = Rayet
  and Collignon, p. 69; B.M. F 480 = Plate LVIII.; Reinach, i. 278.

Footnote 1419:

  Petersburg 830 = Reinach, i. 150 = _Wiener Vorl._ A. 8; Naples 3231,
  3235 = Reinach, i. 299, 102; parody, B.M. F 366.

Footnote 1420:

  Bibl. Nat. 186 = _Jahrbuch_, vii. (1892), pl. 2; Munich 400 =
  Reinach, ii. 116; Roscher, i. 1279.

Footnote 1421:

  _Mon. Antichi_, ix. pl. 15: see _Jahrbuch_, 1891, pl. 4, p. 190.

Footnote 1422:

  See for the various types _J.H.S_, xiv. p. 171.

Footnote 1423:

  Berlin 2301 = Reinach, i. 381; Petersburg 812 = Reinach, i. 381 =
  Millin-Reinach, i. 58 (doubtful).

Footnote 1424:

  Reinach, ii. 16; Naples 2858 = Overbeck, _Her. Bildw._ pl. 28, 5;
  _ibid._ 1755 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1848, fig. 1939; _ibid._ 1761 =
  Millingen-Reinach, 16.

Footnote 1425:

  B.M. D 33, F 57.

Footnote 1426:

  Reinach, ii. 175: cf. _Boston Mus. Report_ for 1899, No. 38.

Footnote 1427:

  Vienna 333 = Reinach, i. 169; Berlin 2184 = Reinach, i. 296 =
  Baumeister, ii. p. 1113, fig. 1310; Reinach, i. 143; Roscher, iii.
  969 (in Berlin).

Footnote 1428:

  Vienna 333 = Reinach, i. 169 = Roscher, iii. 971; Reinach i. 381;
  Millin-Reinach, ii. 24.

Footnote 1429:

  B.M. E 446.

Footnote 1430:

  Petersburg 349 = Reinach, i. 19; _ibid._ ii. 9, 316; Naples 1984 =
  Baumeister, ii. p. 1116, fig. 1313.

Footnote 1431:

  B.M. F 166; Reinach, i. 132 (in Louvre); Millin-Reinach, ii. 68;
  Naples 1984; Helbig, 117 = Reinach, i. 390; _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1890,
  p. 90 (Berlin); and cf. B.M. B 641 (possibly Orestes and Pylades at
  Omphalos?).

Footnote 1432:

  Petersburg 2189 (according to Roscher, iii. p. 993); but see Reinach,
  i. 5, and above under Kadmos.

Footnote 1433:

  Reinach, i. 105 = Naples 3223; _ibid._ 133 = Baumeister, i. p. 757,
  fig. 808; _ibid._ i. 158 = Petersburg 420; Naples S.A. 24; and see
  B.M. F 155, and Reinach, i. 279.

Footnote 1434:

  Reinach, i. 321 = Baumeister, ii. p. 1009, fig. 1215 (Jatta Coll.).

Footnote 1435:

  See generally on Athenian cults, as illustrated by vase-paintings,
  Harrison, _Mythol. and Mon. of Athens_, Introd. p. xxi ff.

Footnote 1436:

  On one of these vases the scene (in the interior of a cup) is watched
  by a group of Athenians at the foot of a hill, round the outside of
  the cup (Reinach, i. 107 = Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pls. 39–40).

Footnote 1437:

  See Harrison, _op. cit._ p. lxxxiv ff.

Footnote 1438:

  Cf. Strabo, ix. § 392, and see for Lykos in another connection p. 124
  above. In the vase here given they witness the exploits of their
  kinsman Theseus (on the obverse).

Footnote 1439:

  Cf. $1$2 1893, pl. 9, p. 130 ff., and Frazer’s _Pausanias_, ii. p.
  203.

Footnote 1440:

  E 224 = Plate XLI. = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pls. 8–9.

Footnote 1441:

  Furtwaengler (_50^{tes} Winckelmannsfestprogr._ p. 163) refers the
  Orpheus scenes to the Aeschylean tetralogy of the Lykourgeia.

Footnote 1442:

  B.M. E 390; Naples 1978, 2889, 3143 (see Reinach, i. 176); Reinach,
  i. 403 = Roscher, iii. p. 1181; Roscher, iii. p. 1179 (in Berlin).

Footnote 1443:

  Munich 383; Reinach, i. 63; ii. 80.

Footnote 1444:

  B.M. E 301; Naples 3114; Reinach, i. 186, 327 (= Roscher, iii. p.
  1185–86); Roscher, iii. p. 1184: see also _J.H.S._ ix. p. 143.

Footnote 1445:

  Reinach, i. 493 = Roscher, iii. p. 1178.

Footnote 1446:

  She occurs on B.M. F 270, Petersburg 498, and Karlsruhe 256.

Footnote 1447:

  Reinach, i. 96 = Helbig, 99; _Röm. Mitth._ 1888, pl. 9; and see
  Naples 3143 = Reinach, i. 176.

Footnote 1448:

  Jatta 1538 = Reinach, i. 526.

Footnote 1449:

  Athens 1344 = Dumont-Pottier, i. pl. 14.

Footnote 1450:

  Schreiber-Anderson, _Atlas_, pl. 5, 10 = Reinach, ii. 333, 5
  (burlesque scene with actor as Taras on dolphin: see p. 160).

Footnote 1451:

  B.M. E 447; Louvre F 166; Helbig, 189 = Reinach, i. 268; Reinach, i.
  122; Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ 53, 2; Naples 1851 = _Jahrbuch_,
  1887, p. 113; _Ath. Mitth._ xxii. (1897), pl. 13: see for the myth,
  Hdt. viii. 138 and Roscher, _s.v._

Footnote 1452:

  Reinach, i. 147, 509; ii. 81, 271.

Footnote 1453:

  Munich 849 = Reinach, i. 258.

Footnote 1454:

  See pp. 99, 111, 132.

Footnote 1455:

  _Wiener Vorl._ A. 10, 3.

Footnote 1456:

  _Ibid._ iii. 4: see _Röm. Mitth._ 1894, p. 285.

Footnote 1457:

  B.M. F 6, 85, 230; Reinach, i. 492, ii. 295.

Footnote 1458:

  B.M. F 158, 278; Naples R.C. 239 (= Reinach, i. 482), 3253 (=
  Reinach, i. 330 = _Wiener Vorl._ vii. 6b, 1), and 2421 (= Reinach,
  ii. 278 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pls. 26–8); Millin-Reinach, i.
  56 (= Bibl. Nat. 427) and 61; Millingen-Reinach, 37.

Footnote 1459:

  B.M. E 12; Naples 2613; Louvre F 203; Munich 4 = Reinach, ii. 57;
  Reinach, ii. 56.

Footnote 1460:

  _Wiener Vorl._ 1889, 6, 2; B.M. B 158, 566; Micali, _Storia_, 91.

Footnote 1461:

  Inghirami, _Vasi Fitt._ iv. 304 = Thiersch, _Tyrrhen. Amph._ p. 64.

Footnote 1462:

  B.M. E 40; Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 2, fig. 2 (Louvre G 35);
  _ibid._ pl. 22, 2; Reinach, i. 166.

Footnote 1463:

  Engelmann-Anderson, _Iliad_, v. 24, vi. 25.

Footnote 1464:

  B.M. E 19; Vienna 231 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1890–91, 1, 6.

Footnote 1465:

  B.M. B 591; Berlin 2264 = Reinach, i. 508, 4.

Footnote 1466:

  _Boston Mus. Report_ for 1899, No. 22: see Hartwig, _Meistersch._ p.
  119, note 1.

Footnote 1467:

  Louvre A 256 = _Jahrbuch_, 1887, pl. 11.

Footnote 1468:

  B.M. E 253, E 295.

Footnote 1469:

  B.M. E 573.

Footnote 1470:

  See above, p. 102.

Footnote 1471:

  See above, p. 111.

Footnote 1472:

  François vase; B.M. B 176, F 162, F 277; Reinach, i. 154 (= Naples
  2411), 309 (Louvre E 700), 391 (Munich 805); Furtwaengler and
  Reichhold, pl. 15 (a fine R.F. example).

Footnote 1473:

  François vase; B.M. E 473; _J.H.S._ xvii. pl. 6; Munich 846 =
  Millingen-Reinach, 8; _Mon. Antichi_, ix. pl. 2; Reinach, i. 22, 474,
  ii. 272.

Footnote 1474:

  For Herakles and Pholos see p. 102.

Footnote 1475:

  B.M. B 620 (Achilles); Munich 611 = Reinach, i. 419 (Herakles);
  Reinach, ii. 91 (Achilles); B.M. B 77 = Fig. 98 (parody).

Footnote 1476:

  See _Jahrbuch_, 1886, pp. 202–4, Nos. 51–9, 94.

Footnote 1477:

  Reinach, ii. 209, 289; Athens 1246: cf. B.M. B 226.

Footnote 1478:

  Reinach, i. 58, 452; Helbig, 237 = _Mus. Greg._ ii. 82, 2_b_;
  Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ 8, 2.

Footnote 1479:

  _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1890, p. 2.

Footnote 1480:

  B.M. F 550; _Wiener Vorl._ E. pls. 7–8, fig. 3 (cf. p. 88).

Footnote 1481:

  B.M. F 370.

Footnote 1482:

  See above, p. 112.

Footnote 1483:

  François vase; Athens 644; Reinach, i. 332, 429.

Footnote 1484:

  Reinach, i. 259.

Footnote 1485:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 427, 428, 430, 436, 679, 680: cf. E 180.

Footnote 1486:

  Cf. Virgil, _Aen._ iii. 216 (_virgineae vultus_) and 241 (_obscenae
  volucres_).

Footnote 1487:

  See, _J.H.S._ xiii. p. 103 ff.

Footnote 1488:

  B.M. B 4, B 16 (?): see Vol. I. p. 344.

Footnote 1489:

  See p. 115; B.M. E 302; Reinach, i. 119, 201; and for two Harpies,
  with name inscribed, in connection with this story, Berlin 1682 =
  Reinach, i. 441.

Footnote 1490:

  Louvre A 478.

Footnote 1491:

  B.M. E 440; _J.H.S._ xiii. pl. 1; _Strena Helbigiana_, p. 31.

Footnote 1492:

  On Sirens generally, and especially as death-deities, see Weicker,
  _Der Seelenvogel_ (1902).

Footnote 1493:

  Berlin 2157 = _Jahrbuch_, 1886, p. 211; on B.M. E 477 a Siren of the
  ordinary decorative type appears with allusion to the death of
  Prokris, perhaps as indicating her departing soul.

Footnote 1494:

  B.M. B 651.

Footnote 1495:

  Louvre E 667 = _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1893, p. 238.

Footnote 1496:

  B.M. B 510: cf. Weicker, p. 48.

Footnote 1497:

  Weicker, p. 120, fig. 46.

Footnote 1498:

  _E.g._ B.M. A 1135; _Cat. of Terracottas_, B 291, 292, 479.

Footnote 1499:

  Louvre E 667, 723; Vienna 318; Munich 1077.

Footnote 1500:

  Munich 1050.

Footnote 1501:

  B.M. B 215; Louvre A 441, E 858; Berlin 1727: cf. Athens 531 and
  Wilisch, _Altkor. Thonindustrie_, pl. 3, fig. 38.

Footnote 1502:

  B.M. B 429.

Footnote 1503:

  See above, p. 117; and cf. Bibl. Nat. 278 and Athens 1480 = _Wiener
  Vorl._ 1889, 9, 8.

Footnote 1504:

  B.M. B 125, B 539, etc.

Footnote 1505:

  B.M. B 650; Reinach, i. 319; _J.H.S._ xix. p. 235.

Footnote 1506:

  Reinach, i. 471.

Footnote 1507:

  Naples 2846 = _Festsehr. für Overbeck_, p. 103.

Footnote 1508:

  B.M. B 32 and Athens 592 (with Hermes); Naples 3254 = Reinach, i. 327
  = _Wiener Vorl._ 1889, 9, 7.

Footnote 1509:

  Reinach, i. 54, 258, 480, ii. 236.

Footnote 1510:

  B.M. E 434; Reinach, i. 23, 53.

Footnote 1511:

  See above, p. 144.

Footnote 1512:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1887, pl. 11.

Footnote 1513:

  Reinach, ii. 319.

Footnote 1514:

  _Boston Mus. Report_, 1899, p. 64, No. 21 (B.F.).

Footnote 1515:

  Reinach, i. 220; and see ii. 314.

Footnote 1516:

  _Bourguignon Cat._ 57.

Footnote 1517:

  See p. 29 above.

Footnote 1518:

  B.M. B 45, B 65, E 11, E 35, Bibl. Nat. 177, Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic.
  Vasenb._ 8, 1 (Pegasos); B.M. B 105, B 417, and Louvre A 307
  (Chimaera).

Footnote 1519:

  B.M. E 170; Reinach, ii. 309.

Footnote 1520:

  Bibl. Nat. 449 = Reinach, i. 129.

Footnote 1521:

  _Amer. Journ. of Arch._ 1900, pl. 5 (cf. pl. 4).

Footnote 1522:

  Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ 12, 2; B.M. B 308 (three Minotaurs).

Footnote 1523:

  Bibl. Nat. 1066 = _Gaz. Arch._ 1879, pl. 3: see, _J.H.S._ xi. p. 349.

Footnote 1524:

  Reinach, i. 188.

Footnote 1525:

  _Ibid._ i. 498.

Footnote 1526:

  B.M. F 218.

Footnote 1527:

  Athens 961 = _Ath. Mitth._ xvi. pl. 9 (probably taken from a Satyric
  drama).

Footnote 1528:

  Reinach, i. 459.

Footnote 1529:

  See above, p. 12.

Footnote 1530:

  Munich 468 = _J.H.S._ xix. p. 217 = _Philologus_, 1898, pl. 1.

Footnote 1531:

  B.M. B 433; Berlin 1770; Athens 713 = Heydemann, _Gr. Vasenb._ pl. 8,
  4; Louvre F 100, 104 (between Sirens): cf. Ar. _Av._ 800.

Footnote 1532:

  François vase; Reinach, i. 27, 54, 61, 470, ii. 295; B.M. B 77;
  Millin-Reinach, i. 63; _Wiener Vorl._ ii. 5, 2; and cf. B.M. G 178
  and Jahn, _Arch. Beitr._ pl. 12, 1.

Footnote 1533:

  Cf. Naples 2609 (Hipparchos); B.M. E 46, Athens 1162, and Louvre G
  103 (Leagros); Athens 1020 = _Jahrbuch_, ii. p. 163 (Glaukon); B.M. E
  300 and Oxford 309 (Kleinias); Reinach, i. 513, 6 (Megakles).

Footnote 1534:

  B.M. B 80; Berlin 1686 = Rayet and Collignon, pl. 7, and 1882 =
  Reinach, ii. 122.

Footnote 1535:

  See p. 60.

Footnote 1536:

  See p. 53; also Reinach, i. 472 and ii. 198, 4 (both Dionysiac).

Footnote 1537:

  Oxford 292 (Persephone); Reinach, ii. 321, 4; _ibid._ 122, 2 (=
  Berlin 2129): see Hartwig, _Meistersch._ p. 48, note; also _Él. Cér._
  ii. 108, and Reinach, ii. 286.

Footnote 1538:

  _Anzeiger_, 1895, p. 36 (in Berlin).

Footnote 1539:

  B.M. B 633.

Footnote 1540:

  B.M. E 284 = _Mon. Antichi_, ix. pl. 1.

Footnote 1541:

  B.M. B 80, B 585, B 648.

Footnote 1542:

  Naples 2858; _Mus. Greg._ ii. 71, 1 _a_.

Footnote 1543:

  B.M. B 79; Louvre F 10; Reinach, i. 428; _Mus. Greg._ ii. 71, 1 _a_;
  Munich 386 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 19; and see under Nike,
  p. 87.

Footnote 1544:

  Bologna 275; B.M. B 362.

Footnote 1545:

  Berlin 1727 = Reinach, i. 429; Athens 1428 = Heydemann, _Gr. Vasenb._
  pl. 11, 3 (sacrifice to Hekate?); Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 3, fig.
  2.

Footnote 1546:

  B.M. E 455, 456, 494; _Él. Cér._ ii. 105, 108; Millin-Reinach, i. 8;
  Micali, _Storia_, pl. 97, fig. 2; _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1895, p. 100
  (Louvre).

Footnote 1547:

  B.M. B 3.

Footnote 1548:

  B.M. E 455; Athens 1858 = Baumeister, i. p. 211, fig. 165 = Reinach,
  i. 396.

Footnote 1549:

  B.M. E 284; Bologna 286; Reinach, i. 403 = Schreiber-Anderson, 25, 8
  (referred to the Thargelia by Reisch, _Gr. Weihgeschenke_, p. 80).

Footnote 1550:

  Berlin 1727, 2010.

Footnote 1551:

  B.M. E 114, E 291; Bibl. Nat. 94; Reinach, ii. 135.

Footnote 1552:

  B.M. E 88; _Mus. Greg._ ii. 78, 2 _b_; and see Stackelberg, pl. 35.

Footnote 1553:

  Reinach, ii. 286; _Wiener Vorl._ 1890–91, pl. 7, 2 = _Röm. Mitth._ v.
  (1890), p. 324; _Mus. Greg._ 71, 1 _b_.

Footnote 1554:

  Naples 3358 = Reinach, i. 313 = Schreiber-Anderson, 20, 3: see Miss
  Harrison’s _Prolegomena to Gk. Religion_, p. 157.

Footnote 1555:

  De Witte, _Coll. à l’Hôtel Lambert_, pl. 29.

Footnote 1556:

  De Witte, _op. cit._ pl. 22.

Footnote 1557:

  _J.H.S._ xix. p. 228 (in Naples).

Footnote 1558:

  Naples 2458 = _J.H.S._ xix. p. 227: cf. B.M. B 641.

Footnote 1559:

  Athens 695.

Footnote 1560:

  _J.H.S._ xx. p. 101.

Footnote 1561:

  Karlsruhe 278 = Reinach, i. 271.

Footnote 1562:

  Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ pl. 31, 1.

Footnote 1563:

  Fig. 17, Vol. I. p. 140 = Munich 51.

Footnote 1564:

  B.M. E 494, E 585; _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1895, p. 103; Berlin 2213;
  Naples 1760 (= Millingen-Reinach, 52), and S.A. 647 (= _Él. Cér._ iv.
  19); Gerhard, _Akad. Abhandl._ pl. 63, figs. 1, 4, 5; _Él. Cér._ iii.
  pls. 79, 80. They appear to be especially associated with terminal
  figures.

Footnote 1565:

  Miss Harrison’s comprehensive _Prolegomena to Greek Religion_
  (Cambridge Press, 1903) appeared too recently for the writer to be
  able to make detailed use of it in this section. It must, of course,
  be borne in mind that many of the interpretations in that work are
  only conjectural.

Footnote 1566:

  Athens 199, 200 = _Jahrbuch_, 1899, p. 201; _ibid._ 214 = Reinach, i.
  190 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1943, fig. 2071.

Footnote 1567:

  Athens 688 = Reinach, i. 165.

Footnote 1568:

  B.M. B 63 = Plate LVIII.; _Forman Sale Cat._ 279 (now in B.M.);
  Baumeister, i. p. 238, fig. 217 = Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ pl.
  1; Athens 688 = Reinach, i. 164.

Footnote 1569:

  B.M. D 62 = Plate LV. fig. 1; Athens 1651 = Dumont-Pottier, i. pl.
  32; Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ pl. 33. A fine R.F. example in
  _Monuments Piot_, i. pls. 5–6 (in Louvre).

Footnote 1570:

  Bibl. Nat. 353; Micali, _Storia_, pl. 96, figs. 1–2.

Footnote 1571:

  Athens 688 = Baumeister, i. p. 306, fig. 321 = Reinach, i. 164;
  _Anzeiger_, 1893, p. 86 (Berlin). Cf. Fig. 123, p. 71.

Footnote 1572:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1891, pl. 4; _J.H.S._ xix. p. 228; Athens 688.

Footnote 1573:

  B.M. B 543, D 5 = Plate XL.

Footnote 1574:

  B.M. D 65 ff. and Athens 1672–1836 _passim_: cf. B.M. F 93. Plate LV.
  fig. 2 = B.M. D 70.

Footnote 1575:

  B.M. F 93 (Fig. 20, Vol. I. p. 144), 212.

Footnote 1576:

  B.M. F 276, 279–85, 352 (Fig. 106, Vol. I. p. 477).

Footnote 1577:

  B.M. F 353.

Footnote 1578:

  Millin-Reinach, ii. 29.

Footnote 1579:

  B.M. D 39, 41, 43–45, 56, 70, F 93–96; Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic.
  Vasenb._ pl. 34. See Plate LV. fig. 2 and Fig. 19, Vol. I. p. 143.

Footnote 1580:

  B.M. D 54, 65, 67–86; F 212–13, 336; Athens 1692 = _J.H.S._ xix. pl.
  2, and 1694 = Benndorf, _op. cit._ pl. 18, 1; _ibid._ pl. 19, 2.

Footnote 1581:

  A unique instance of a sculptured _stele_ copied on a white lekythos
  is _Burlington F.A.C. Cat._ (1903), p. 104, No. 25.

Footnote 1582:

  B.M. D 51.

Footnote 1583:

  B.M. F 352 = Fig. 106.

Footnote 1584:

  B.M. (uncatalogued).

Footnote 1585:

  B.M. D 21.

Footnote 1586:

  B.M. D 60.

Footnote 1587:

  B.M. D 58.

Footnote 1588:

  B.M. D 35; Engelmann-Anderson, _Odyssey_, iii. 10.

Footnote 1589:

  B.M. D 56 = Fig. 19.

Footnote 1590:

  B.M. D 5 = Plate XL.

Footnote 1591:

  Athens 1689 = Reinach, i. 512.

Footnote 1592:

  See above, p. 69.

Footnote 1593:

  See p. 52; also B.M. (uncatalogued).

Footnote 1594:

  B.M. D 58–9; Athens 1093 (= Roscher, ii. 2678), 1653–54 (=
  Dumont-Pottier, i. pls. 27–9); _Jahrbuch_, 1895, pl. 2. Cf. Fig. 123,
  p. 71.

Footnote 1595:

  B.M. D 54; Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. V._ pls. 14 and 33. See above, p.
  72.

Footnote 1596:

  B.M. F 279, 280, 282.

Footnote 1597:

  B.M. F 276, 284; Millin-Reinach, ii. 32–33.

Footnote 1598:

  B.M. F 281.

Footnote 1599:

  B.M. F 276, 279–84, 352 (Fig. 106); Millin-Reinach, ii. 38.

Footnote 1600:

  See p. 68.

Footnote 1601:

  Louvre E 667 = _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1893, p. 238.

Footnote 1602:

  _Anzeiger_, 1890, p. 89 (Berlin); but see p. 76, under Asklepios.

Footnote 1603:

  B.M. B 80: see for other parodies of processions or sacrifices Athens
  1132, 1136, 1138.

Footnote 1604:

  B.M. B 509; Berlin 1830 = _J.H.S._ ii. pl. 14, and 1697 (as horses).

Footnote 1605:

  _J.H.S._ xiii. pl. 4, and p. 81; B.M. B 77 = Fig. 98: see generally
  _J.H.S._ xiii. p. 77 ff. and Vol. I. p. 391.

Footnote 1606:

  Vienna 321 (cf. Ar. _Ach._ 729 ff.), Hermes with dog got up as a pig.

Footnote 1607:

  B.M. F 99; Berlin 3046 = Baumeister, ii. p. 821, fig. 904 (see
  _Jahrbuch_, i. p. 283).

Footnote 1608:

  _Jahrbuch_, i. (1886), p. 260 ff.

Footnote 1609:

  See for instance pp. 107, 118, 123.

Footnote 1610:

  B.M. F 233: cf. Reinach, i. 114.

Footnote 1611:

  Schreiber-Anderson, 5, 10 = Heydemann, p. 307 = Reinach, ii. 332, 5.

Footnote 1612:

  B.M. F 543.

Footnote 1613:

  B.M. F 189 = Fig. 134.

Footnote 1614:

  Naples 3240 = Reinach, i. 114 = Baumeister, i. pl. 5, fig. 422.

Footnote 1615:

  B.M. E 65.

Footnote 1616:

  See _Philologus_, 1868, pls. 1–4, p. 1 ff.

Footnote 1617:

  Jatta 1528 = _Jahrbuch_, 1886, p. 273; B.M. E 790; Naples 2846 =
  _Festschr. für Overbeck_, p. 103.

Footnote 1618:

  B.M. E 467 (Satyric chorus); Reinach, ii. 324, 5; ii. 288.

Footnote 1619:

  _Boston Mus. Report_, 1898, No. 50.

Footnote 1620:

  Jatta 1402 = Reinach, i. 413.

Footnote 1621:

  B.M. F 233, F 289.

Footnote 1622:

  _Wiener Vorl._ B. 3, 5 _c_; Millin-Reinach, i. 20.

Footnote 1623:

  Vol. I. p. 472: see also _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, iv. p. 10; Vogel,
  _Scenen Eurip. Tragödien_ (where an exhaustive list is given), and
  Huddilston, _Gk. Tragedy in the Light of Vase-paintings_, where the
  subject is also treated in detail.

Footnote 1624:

  See Vol. I. p. 389, and Plates XXXIII.-IV.; for a complete series of
  illustrations, _Mon. dell’ Inst._ x. pls. 47–8 = Reinach, i. 210–15.

Footnote 1625:

  B.F.: B.M. B 48, B 64; Berlin 1655, 1805; Bibl. Nat. 252, 354;
  Reinach, ii. 129. R.F.: Reinach, i. 223 (= _Wiener Vorl._ D. 5), 424
  (Berlin 2180), 454, ii. 134 (Berlin 2262), 137 (men with dogs);
  Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pls. 15–6 = Bibl. Nat. 523.

Footnote 1626:

  B.M. B 271, B 295, B 607; E 39, 63 (parade of boxers before judges);
  Athens 1169 = Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ 31, 2 _a_; Reinach, ii.
  292.

Footnote 1627:

  B.M. B 191, B 295, B 603; E 94, 95; Bibl. Nat. 522 = Hartwig,
  _Meistersch._ pl. 15, 2; _Mus. Greg._ ii. 16, 2 _a_; Vienna 332 =
  _Wiener Vorl._ 1890–91, 1, 4.

Footnote 1628:

  B.M. E 78 (very realistic), B 604, B 610; Louvre F 276, 278, 314;
  Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 64.

Footnote 1629:

  _Arch.-epigr. Mitth. aus Oesterr._ 1881, pl. 4.

Footnote 1630:

  B.M. B 48, B 134 (= Fig. 135), B 326; Munich 795 = Reinach, i. 422 =
  Baumeister, i. p. 613, fig. 672; Reinach, i. 433, 1 = Baumeister, i.
  p. 573, fig. 611; Reinach, i. 272, ii. 128. See on the subject
  generally _J.H.S._ xxiii. p. 54 ff.

Footnote 1631:

  B.M. B 136, E 164; Louvre F 126; Athens 1188 = Reinach, i. 511;
  Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 21 (Duris, in Boston); De Witte, _Coll. à
  l’Hôtel Lambert_, pl. 23; _Mus. Greg._ ii. 43, 2 _b_.

Footnote 1632:

  B.M. B 380; Louvre F 126, G 37; _Mus. Greg._ ii. 69, 4 _c_, 70, 2
  _a_; De Witte, _op. cit._ pl. 24.

Footnote 1633:

  B.M. B 48; Reinach, ii. 145, 175, 330; _Mus. Greg._ ii. 70, 1 _a_, 2
  _b_; 73, 1 _b_. Athlete exercising with halteres: Louvre G 15;
  _Forman Sale Cat._ 332.

Footnote 1634:

  B.M. B 361. See _J.H.S._ xxiv. p. 70.

Footnote 1635:

  B.M. E 164.

Footnote 1636:

  B.M. E 63, 113, 164; _Forman Sale Cat._ 358; and see _Bull. de Corr.
  Hell._ xxiii. p. 164.

Footnote 1637:

  Athens 1478; Millin-Reinach, i. 45; Panathenaic amphora in B.M.

Footnote 1638:

  B.M. B 137, B 609; Munich 498 = Reinach, i. 215; _Mus. Greg._ ii. 42,
  2 _b_; 43, 1 _a_. Starter in foot-race: B.M. E 6, E 101; Reinach, i.
  433, 2; Hartwig, _Meistersch._ p. 45, fig. 6; _Jahrbuch_, 1895, pp.
  185–88; _J.H.S._ xxiii. p. 268 ff.

Footnote 1639:

  B.M. B 133, B 144; Berlin 1655, 1722, 2282; Munich 805; Athens 1546;
  Reinach, i. 12, 100, 199, ii. 61, 253; and see Hartwig, _Meistersch._
  p. 491, note 2.

Footnote 1640:

  B.M. B 130–32, B 677; Berlin 1655; Louvre F 216, F 283; Reinach, ii.
  68, 70, 125, 133; François vase.

Footnote 1641:

  B.M. E 389, F 59; _Tyszkiewicz Coll._ pl. 35; Reinach, ii. 298, 320;
  Baumeister, i. p. 522.

Footnote 1642:

  B.M. B 143; E 6, E 22; B 608; Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ 43, 4
  _b_; Reinach, ii. 128, 129 (= Berlin 2307); Munich 476 = _ibid._ ii.
  127, and 803 = _Jahrbuch_, 1895, p. 196; Hartwig, _op. cit._ pl. 62,
  1. Runner with trainer: _Bourguignon Sale Cat._ 31. See on the
  subject generally _J.H.S._ xxiii. p. 268 ff., and _Jahrbuch_, 1895,
  p. 182 ff.

Footnote 1643:

  Hartwig, _op. cit._ pl. 1 and pl. 16 (= Bibl. Nat. 523); B.M. E 22;
  _Burlington Fine Arts Club Cat._ (1903), p. 100, No. 17.

Footnote 1644:

  Berlin 2307 (one fig.); Reinach, i. 494 (Louvre); _Jahrbuch_, 1887,
  p. 99: cf. B.M. B 628.

Footnote 1645:

  _Bourguignon Sale Cat._ 49; Berlin 2307 = Reinach, ii. 129; Hartwig,
  _op. cit._ pl. 16 (Bibl. Nat. 523); _Jahrbuch_, 1895, p. 190;
  _J.H.S._ xxiii. p. 278.

Footnote 1646:

  See _J.H.S._ xxiii. p. 285 (runners with helmet in hand).

Footnote 1647:

  _Mus. Greg._ ii. 71, 4 _b_; _Jahrbuch_, 1895, p. 191; Munich 803 and
  1240; Hartwig, _op. cit._ pl. 12. See _J.H.S._ _loc. cit._

Footnote 1648:

  B.M. B 144; Reinach, ii. 262, 291, 298, 320 (horsemen): cf. B.M. B
  628.

Footnote 1649:

  Reinach, i. 346 = _Bourguignon Cat._ 17; Louvre G 17, G 36.

Footnote 1650:

  See under Nike, p. 88, note 1070.

Footnote 1651:

  Berlin 2180 = Reinach, i. 424, and 2314; Karlsruhe 242 (Psiax and
  Hilinos).

Footnote 1652:

  Berlin 2178; Louvre G 38 = Hartwig, _Meistersch._ p. 25;
  _Arch.-epigr. Mitth._ 1881, pl. 4; Reinach, i. 324.

Footnote 1653:

  Petersburg 1611 = Baumeister, i. p. 247, fig. 226.

Footnote 1654:

  Munich 895 = Reinach, ii. 106.

Footnote 1655:

  Millin-Reinach, i. 47: cf. the athlete extracting a thorn on Berlin
  2180 = Reinach, i. 424.

Footnote 1656:

  Bibl. Nat. 283 (unexplained subject).

Footnote 1657:

  Salzmann, _Nécropole de Camiros_, pl. 57, 2 = Schreiber-Anderson, 24,
  2.

Footnote 1658:

  B.M. F 232; Naples 2854; Reinach, i. 473; Baumeister, i. p. 585.

Footnote 1659:

  Oxford 288; B.M. B 607; Louvre F 109 (with judges): and see p. 88.

Footnote 1660:

  B.M. E 83; Louvre G 36; Athens 1156 = Reinach, i. 514; _ibid._ ii.
  292 = Baumeister, i. p. 242, fig. 219 (basin inscribed ????S??);
  Schreiber-Anderson, 21, 9 = Reinach, ii. 275; Hartwig, _Meistersch._
  pl. 67, 1, p. 206 (using sponge); Reinach, ii. 134, 275. Youth with
  bath utensils: Berlin 2314.

Footnote 1661:

  B.M. B 271; E 78, 94, 164; Hartwig, _op. cit._ pp. 416–17; _Wiener
  Vorl._ vi. 9; _B.C.H._ xxiii. p. 158 (trainer marking goal).

Footnote 1662:

  See _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, iv. _passim_.

Footnote 1663:

  Three types:—(1) Hare seized by birds: Louvre E 701 = Reinach, i.
  153; Naples 2458; Athens 618. (2) Hare pursued by dogs: B.M. B 119;
  Berlin 340, 1753, 1799; Karlsruhe 170; Petersburg 310, 386; Reinach,
  i. 34; _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1893, p. 227. (3) Dogs accompanied by
  hunters: B.M. B 678, D 60; Berlin 306, and 1727 = Reinach, i. 431;
  Oxford 189 (Oikopheles); Bibl. Nat. 187; Naples S.A. 200; B.M. A 1050
  = Plate XIX. fig. 3; Reinach, ii. 333; _Ant. Denkm._ ii. 44–5.

Footnote 1664:

  B.M. B 147 (cover); Helbig, 7; Munich 411 (Amasis); Reinach, ii. 275;
  Millingen, _Anc. Uned. Mon._ i. 23; _Anzeiger_, 1895, p. 40.

Footnote 1665:

  B.M. B 7; Schreiber-Anderson, pl. 80, 3.

Footnote 1666:

  _Ant. Denkm._ ii. 44–5.

Footnote 1667:

  B.M. B 37 (= Plate XXI.), F 154; Louvre E 696 = Reinach, i. 162;
  Vienna 217 = Reinach, i. 170; Munich 211 = Fig. 90, Vol. I. p. 316:
  cf. _Burlington Fine Arts Club Cat._ 1903, p. 115, No. 62, for B.F.
  jug with man hiding in tree and attacked by boar and lion.

Footnote 1668:

  Reinach, ii. 144, 223.

Footnote 1669:

  B.M. B 52 = _Rev. Arch._ xviii. (1891), p. 367; Louvre F 26 = _ibid._
  p. 369; Millin-Reinach, i. 18.

Footnote 1670:

  Millin-Reinach, ii. 11.

Footnote 1671:

  Berlin 1900; Reinach, ii. 293.

Footnote 1672:

  Louvre F 223.

Footnote 1673:

  Munich 583 = _Jahrbuch_, 1890, p. 146 (see p. 129); _Forman Sale
  Cat._ 285.

Footnote 1674:

  _Mélanges Perrot_, p. 252 (in B.M.).

Footnote 1675:

  _Boston Mus. Report_, 1899, No. 22; _Mon. Grecs_, 14–16 (1885–88), p.
  10.

Footnote 1676:

  Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 53; Bibl. Nat. 277 = Reinach, i. 290.

Footnote 1677:

  B.M. E 485; Berlin 2357 = Reinach, i. 423; _ibid._ ii. 179.

Footnote 1678:

  B.M. E 3 (Hischylos), E 60; Munich 111; _Forman Sale Cat._ 336;
  Reinach, i. 454, 4 (Pamphaios): see p. 177.

Footnote 1679:

  Munich 337 = Reinach, i. 238 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 22
  (Euphronios); Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pls. 53–4; _Jahrbuch_, 1888, pl.
  4 (Onesimos); _Mon. Grecs_, 14–16 (1885–88), pl. 5, and see p. 1 ff.;
  _Monuments Piot_, i. pls. 5–6 (in Louvre). Cf. also Louvre G 26.

Footnote 1680:

  See under Warriors, p. 176.

Footnote 1681:

  B.M. F 70, F 306; Berlin 2154: cf. Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._
  pl. 32, 5.

Footnote 1682:

  B.M. B 127; Reinach, ii. 125.

Footnote 1683:

  Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ pl. 32, fig. 5.

Footnote 1684:

  B.M. B 17; Munich 903: see _J.H.S._ xxiii. pp. 139, 142.

Footnote 1685:

  B.M. B 182; Berlin 2417 = Reinach, i. 425 = Baumeister, ii. p. 781,
  fig. 836; Reinach, ii. 191; Oxford 250.

Footnote 1686:

  Reinach, i. 81.

Footnote 1687:

  B.M. E 467 (Satyrs); E 339, F 197, F 245; Berlin 2710 = Reinach, i.
  425 (Eros); Naples 2872 = Millingen, _Anc. Uned. Mon._ pl. 12 =
  Reinach, ii. 169 (Eros); Louvre G 36 (ephebos).

Footnote 1688:

  Louvre F 90 and F 368 = _Rev. Arch._ xxi. (1893), pl. 5; Helbig, p.
  327 = Baumeister, i. p. 622, fig. 695; Reinach, i. 310, 423 (Berlin
  2030).

Footnote 1689:

  Naples 922 = Schreiber-Anderson, 80, 7.

Footnote 1690:

  B.M. E 70, 453–54, 495, F 37, 273, 275; Berlin 2416 and Jatta 1291 =
  Reinach, i. 337, 178; Baumeister, ii. p. 793, fig. 857;
  _Archaeologia_, li. pl. 14; Louvre G 30. See also below, p. 181.

Footnote 1691:

  _Branteghem Sale Cat._ 167 (here a woman); Hartwig, _Meistersch._
  pls. 27, 72, 2.

Footnote 1692:

  Louvre G 81; Reinach, i. 420; Hartwig, _op. cit._ pl. 27, 2.

Footnote 1693:

  Berlin 2177; _J.H.S._ xviii. p. 130.

Footnote 1694:

  B.M. E 205 (?).

Footnote 1695:

  B.M. F 123; Louvre F 60; Berlin 2589 (= Harrison, _Mythol. and Monum.
  of Athens_, p. xliv) and 2394; Millingen, _Anc. Uned. Mon._ pl. 30;
  _Boston Mus. Report_, 1898, No. 27.

Footnote 1696:

  B.M. E 387 (Seileni); Baumeister, iii. p. 1573, fig. 1633 (Eros);
  Gerhard, _Ant. Bildw._ pl. 53.

Footnote 1697:

  Naples 3151 = Reinach, i. 400.

Footnote 1698:

  _Anzeiger_, 1890, p. 89 (in Berlin).

Footnote 1699:

  See _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, iv. p. 110 (F 223, etc.), and Jahn in _Ber.
  d. sächs. Gesellsch._ 1854, p. 256.

Footnote 1700:

  B.M. E 527, 534–37, 548–53 (see Plate XLII.); Baumeister, ii. p. 779;
  _Él. Cér._ ii. 89; _Gaz. Arch._ 1878, pl. 7; Stackelberg, pl. 17;
  Reinach, i. 425: see generally Jahn in _Ber. d. sächs Gesellsch._
  1854, p. 243 ff., pl. 12.

Footnote 1701:

  B.M. F 101 = Fig. 15, Vol. I. p. 137; Reinach, i. 294.

Footnote 1702:

  Bibl. Nat. 361 = Reinach, ii. 262; _Bourguignon Cat._ 52 (in B.M.);
  Reinach, i. 207 (hare).

Footnote 1703:

  Inghirami, _Vasi Fitt._ iv. 387.

Footnote 1704:

  Reinach, i. 294: cf. ii. 137 = Baumeister, i. p. 705, fig. 765, and
  for women with pets see below, p. 173.

Footnote 1705:

  Berlin 2285 = Reinach, i. 196: cf. B.M. E 525 and _Brit. School
  Annual_, 1898–99, p. 65 (Fig. 177).

Footnote 1706:

  Naples 2004 = Reinach, i. 323.

Footnote 1707:

  _Ibid._ ii. 333.

Footnote 1708:

  Berlin 2322 = Micali, _Storia_, 103, 1.

Footnote 1709:

  Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 46.

Footnote 1710:

  B.M. E 171–72; Oxford 266; Baumeister, i. p. 554, fig. 591 (flute):
  cf. _ibid._ iii. p. 1993, fig. 2138 (Iphikles taught the lyre by
  Linos) and the Duris kylix (Plate XXXIX.).

Footnote 1711:

  Reinach, i. 248.

Footnote 1712:

  B.M. E 185; Gerhard, _Ant. Bildw._ pl. 66.

Footnote 1713:

  See p. 95.

Footnote 1714:

  Athens 467 = _Ath. Mitth._ 1892, pl. 10; B.M. E 467, E 804;
  Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pls. 17–8. Single figure: B.M. F 343.

Footnote 1715:

  B.M. E 61; Louvre G 18 (castanets).

Footnote 1716:

  _Forman Sale Cat._ 361 (in Boston).

Footnote 1717:

  Stackelberg, pl. 22; Reinach, i. 61, 372, 469 (Naples 3010); _Rev.
  Arch._ xxvi. (1895), p. 221.

Footnote 1718:

  _Anzeiger_, 1895, p. 40: cf. _B.M. Cat. of Terracottas_, p. 412.

Footnote 1719:

  B.M. B 42, 44; Berlin 1662; and see _J.H.S._ xviii. p. 287.

Footnote 1720:

  B.M. E 271; Berlin 1686; Bologna 271 = Reinach, ii. 150; _Él. Cér._
  ii. 16; Athens 1019 = _Ath. Mitth._ 1891, pl. 10, 2; _Anzeiger_,
  1892, p. 172. Girls playing lyre: _Monuments Piot_, ii. pls. 5–6 (in
  Louvre).

Footnote 1721:

  B.M. E 308; and see Reinach, ii. 187, 3.

Footnote 1722:

  B.M. E 270, E 469; Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pls. 65–6.

Footnote 1723:

  B.M. B 139, B 141; Louvre G 1 = _Amer. Journ. of Arch._ 1896, p. 9;
  Petersburg 1603 = Schreiber-Anderson, 7, 14; Vienna 234.

Footnote 1724:

  B.M. B 188, E 354; Reinach, ii. 274; Louvre G 103 = _Atlas_, pl. 101
  (Euphronios).

Footnote 1725:

  B.M. E 460; Bologna 286; Athens 1260 = Dumont-Pottier, i. 16; Helbig,
  90 = _Mus. Greg._ ii. 60, 3; Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ 43, 4
  _a_.

Footnote 1726:

  _Mus. Greg._ ii. 22, 2 _a_.

Footnote 1727:

  B.M. E 270.

Footnote 1728:

  B.M. E 132.

Footnote 1729:

  B.M. B 192, B 299, E 37; Athens 1158 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1984, fig.
  2127; _Él. Cér._ ii. 16: see also Hartwig, _Meistersch._ p. 255, note
  2.

Footnote 1730:

  Berlin 639, 871, 885 = _Ant. Denkm._ i. pl. 8, Nos. 7, 14, 23.

Footnote 1731:

  Berlin 608 ff.; 800  93: cf. _op. cit._ pl. 8, Nos. 14 _b_, 17, 18 (=
  885, 869, 868); also Nos. 1, 4, 12, 19 _b_, 22, 26 (= Berlin 608,
  802, 616, 893, 827, 611). See also Chapter V., Figs. 65, 69.

Footnote 1732:

  B.M. B 432; Munich 731 = Fig. 67, Vol. I. p. 213; _Gaz. Arch._ 1880,
  p. 106.

Footnote 1733:

  Figs. 67, 71, Vol. I. pp. 213, 223.

Footnote 1734:

  Fig. 70, Vol. I. p. 218.

Footnote 1735:

  Fig. 74, Vol. I. p. 228.

Footnote 1736:

  Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 17, 1, and see _ibid._ p. 174; Kopenhagen
  125; Millingen, _Anc. Uned. Mon._ pl. 37.

Footnote 1737:

  Berlin 831 = _Ant. Denkm._ i. pl. 8, fig. 3 _a_. See on the subject
  _Rev. Arch._ iii. (1904), p. 45 ff.

Footnote 1738:

  Berlin 2294 = Baumeister, i. p. 506, fig. 547.

Footnote 1739:

  B. M. B 507; Reinach, i. 224 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1582, fig. 1639
  (in Boston).

Footnote 1740:

  _J.H.S._ xxiv. p. 305; _Branteghem Cat._ 44. See also _Él. Cér._ i.
  83.

Footnote 1741:

  Kopenhagen 119 = Schreiber-Anderson, 73, 7.

Footnote 1742:

  See p. 40: cf. also for a sculptor, p. 16, note 53.

Footnote 1743:

  Berlin 1806 = Fig. 136 (Nikosthenes); Louvre F 77 = _ibid._ fig. 13;
  Froehner, _Musées de France_, pl. 13, 1 (sowing).

Footnote 1744:

  B.M. F 147: see p. 73, and Robert, _Arch. Märchen_, pl. 5, p. 198 ff.

Footnote 1745:

  Berlin 2274 = _Él. Cér._ ii. 74.

Footnote 1746:

  Louvre F 68.

Footnote 1747:

  Louvre F 69 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1888, pl. 1, figs. 9–10; _ibid._ pl. 1,
  figs. 2, 7.

Footnote 1748:

  Vienna 335 = Schreiber-Anderson, pl. 64, figs. 1, 3; _ibid._ pl. 64,
  fig. 6 (in Naples); Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 5; and see under
  Hermes and Seilenos.

Footnote 1749:

  Reinach, ii. 90.

Footnote 1750:

  B.M. B 226; Berlin 1855 = Baumeister, ii. p. 1047, fig. 1259.

Footnote 1751:

  _Forman Sale Cat._ 323 (now in Boston): cf. _B.M. Cat. of
  Terracotta_, D 550.

Footnote 1752:

  Helbig, 70 = Reinach, i. 106 = Baumeister, ii. p. 1047, figs.
  1260–1261; _Boston Mus. Report_, 1899, p. 69, No. 24.

Footnote 1753:

  Louvre E 635 = Reinach, i. 151; _Boston Mus. Report_, 1899, p. 70,
  No. 25.

Footnote 1754:

  Berlin 1915 = Reinach, ii. 155.

Footnote 1755:

  Froehner, _Musées de France_, pl. 13, 2; _Eranos Vindobonensis_, p.
  381 (woman kneading dough).

Footnote 1756:

  Millin-Reinach, ii. 61.

Footnote 1757:

  Vol. I. p. 342: see also p. 149.

Footnote 1758:

  B.M. E 86; Reinach, i. 224 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1587, fig. 1649 (in
  Boston).

Footnote 1759:

  B.M. E 23.

Footnote 1760:

  Micali, _Storia_, pl. 97, fig. 3.

Footnote 1761:

  B.M. B 339; Louvre F 10, F 56.

Footnote 1762:

  B.M. B 160, B 174, B 257; B 485; _J.H.S._ xxiii. pp. 133, 137, 142.

Footnote 1763:

  B.M. E 810, D 11 (Plate XLIII.); Berlin 2372 (= _Coll. Sabouroff_, i.
  pl. 58), 2373 (= Reinach, i. 440); Athens 1224 and 1225 = Heydemann,
  _Gr. Vasenb._ pl. 10, 1, and Reinach, i. 206; Athens 1588 = $1$2
  1897, pl. 10, 2 (preparations for marriage, with fancy names): see
  generally _Wiener Vorl._ 1888, pl. 8.

Footnote 1764:

  Baumeister, i. p. 313, fig. 328.

Footnote 1765:

  Millingen-Reinach, 44 (in Louvre); Inghirami, _Vasi Fitt._ iv. 314.

Footnote 1766:

  Berlin 2374 = Reinach, i. 128.

Footnote 1767:

  Reinach, i. 173; _J.H.S._ xxiii. p. 133.

Footnote 1768:

  Athens 693.

Footnote 1769:

  Petersburg 151 = Thiersch, _Tyrrhen. Amph._ pl. 5.

Footnote 1770:

  Berlin 1841 = Reinach, ii. 44 (B.F.); Athens 1552 = Heydemann, _Gr.
  Vasenb._ pl. 8, 5; Berlin 2261 = Reinach, i. 440, and 2720 = _Coll.
  Sabouroff_, i. pl. 64; Reinach, i. 2 (Petersburg 1791), 472 (= Jatta
  1526), 477 (= Naples S.A. 316, with fancy names).

Footnote 1771:

  B.M. E 225, 773–74, F 308, 310; Schreiber-Anderson, 83, 4.

Footnote 1772:

  B.M. B 598, E 87, E 193, E 215, D 13; Athens 1550, 1552, and 1589 =
  Reinach, i. 517 (note the use of the ?p???t???); Louvre F 224 = _Él.
  Cér._ iii. 36 B; Stackelberg, 34; Reinach, i. 420, ii. 7, 4: see
  Hartwig, _Meistersch._ p. 340.

Footnote 1773:

  Dumont-Pottier, i. pl. 8 = Schreiber-Anderson, 82, 4.

Footnote 1774:

  Baumeister, iii. p. 1711, fig. 1796.

Footnote 1775:

  _Boston Mus. Report_, 1900, p. 41, No. 10.

Footnote 1776:

  Baumeister, iii. p. 1583, fig. 1641.

Footnote 1777:

  _Ibid._ i. p. 609, fig. 668.

Footnote 1778:

  B.M. E 18; Louvre G 2; Berlin 2272 = Hartwig, _Meistersch._ p. 89;
  Reinach, ii. 146, 7.

Footnote 1779:

  Baumeister, iii. p. 1919, fig. 2034 = Reinach, ii. 148.

Footnote 1780:

  Louvre F 114 = Plate XXX.; B.M. F 101, 207.

Footnote 1781:

  Schreiber-Anderson, 82, 12; B.M. F 139, 207, 342.

Footnote 1782:

  Schreiber-Anderson, 83, 14.

Footnote 1783:

  Berlin 1843 (= Baumeister, i. p. 243, fig. 221), and 2707 (= _Coll.
  Sabouroff_, i. 62, 2); Jatta 654 = _Gaz. Arch._ 1880, pl. 19;
  Millin-Reinach, ii. 9 (frontispiece); Reinach, ii. 146, 328, 1;
  Baumeister, i. p. 242, fig. 220; B.M. D 29, E 90, 201–2; and see
  generally Hartwig, _op. cit._ p. 599.

Footnote 1784:

  Louvre F 197 and F 203 = _Amer. Journ. of Arch._ 1896, p. 3 =
  Schreiber-Anderson, 57, 5.

Footnote 1785:

  B.M. F 311; and see _Él. Cér._ iv. 10–22.

Footnote 1786:

  B.M. B 329–38; Louvre F 296; Reinach, ii. 151: cf. B.M. E 159 and
  Athens 1429 = Heydemann, _Gr. Vasenb._ pl. 9, 2.

Footnote 1787:

  B.M. D 6; Munich 142: cf. Berlin 1841 = Reinach, ii. 44.

Footnote 1788:

  B.M. E 241, E 721; _Branteghem Sale Cat._ 98–9.

Footnote 1789:

  Athens 1550 = Heydemann, _op. cit._ pl. 9, 5.

Footnote 1790:

  B.M. E 34.

Footnote 1791:

  B.M. E 769.

Footnote 1792:

  B.M. E 190.

Footnote 1793:

  B.M. E 88.

Footnote 1794:

  _Branteghem Cat._ 167.

Footnote 1795:

  Naples R.C. 117 = Reinach, i. 490, 22.

Footnote 1796:

  Munich 903 = Reinach, ii. 110.

Footnote 1797:

  B.M. B 53, B 163, B 409; Berlin 3993 = _Coll. Sabouroff_, i. pl. 51.

Footnote 1798:

  Bibl. Nat. 94; Athens 466 = Plate XLVII.

Footnote 1799:

  Oxford 320.

Footnote 1800:

  B.M. E 396.

Footnote 1801:

  _Branteghem Cat._ 163.

Footnote 1802:

  Petersburg 875 = Reinach, i. 39: cf. Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 27.

Footnote 1803:

  B.M. F 232; Athens 1031 = Heydemann, _Gr. Vasenb._ pl. 9, 3; Reinach,
  i. 473; _Mus. Borb._ vii. 58; _Mon. Barone_, pls. 3, 9; and see pp.
  165, 182.

Footnote 1804:

  See p. 169.

Footnote 1805:

  See on the subject Winter in _Arch. Zeit._ 1885, p. 187 ff.; and
  _Mon. Grecs_, 1885–88, p. 25 ff.

Footnote 1806:

  B.F.: B.M. B 165, B 657; _J.H.S._ xviii. p. 293; Bibl. Nat. 172 and
  203 = Reinach, ii. 95. R.F.: Louvre G 47–8; Bologna 274; Helbig, 167
  and 174 (= Reinach, ii. 133); Reinach, ii. 114; Vienna 324 = _Wiener
  Vorl._ vii. 1 (Duris).

Footnote 1807:

  B.F.: B.M. B 147, B 309, B 360; Louvre F 12, F 39, F 53, F 150;
  Reinach, ii. 124, 131. R.F.: B.M. E 254, E 276, E 448; Louvre G 44;
  Baumeister, iii. p. 2034, fig. 2207 (Duris). Late: B.M. F 158, F 174;
  Munich 382 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 35.

Footnote 1808:

  B.F.: _Ant. Denkm._ ii. 44–5 (Proto-Cor.); B.M. B 75, B 199, B 212, B
  400; Athens 623; _Bourguignon Cat._ 14. R.F.: B.M. E 7, E 33, E 43, E
  808; _Röm. Mitth._ 1890, p. 332. Late: B.M. F 175, F 215. Horseman
  and foot-soldier: two uncatalogued in B.M.

Footnote 1809:

  See pp. 3, 7, 126.

Footnote 1810:

  B.M. B 224, B 243; Athens 1161 = Hartwig, _Meistersch._ p. 87;
  Reinach, ii. 129, 131, 4, 133.

Footnote 1811:

  _J.H.S._ xviii. p. 293; Bibl. Nat. 203 = Reinach, ii. 95.

Footnote 1812:

  Munich 374 = Fig. 137; Millin-Reinach, i. 39; and see under Hector,
  p. 127.

Footnote 1813:

  B.M. E 405.

Footnote 1814:

  _Anzeiger_, 1892, p. 165: cf. Reinach, ii. 133 and Ar. _Ach._ 574.

Footnote 1815:

  Louvre G 5: see Hartwig, _Meistersch._ p. 122, note.

Footnote 1816:

  B.M. E 33; Munich 1229; _Forman Sale Cat._ 337 (in Boston); Hartwig,
  _op. cit._ pl. 14, 1: cf. Berlin 2296 = Reinach, i. 428, and B.M. E
  598.

Footnote 1817:

  See note 1815; also _Festschrift für O. Benndorf_, p. 66.

Footnote 1818:

  B.M. B 303–05; Berlin 1897 = Reinach, ii. 124; _Jahrbuch_, iv.
  (1889), pl. 10; Louvre F 285, F 345.

Footnote 1819:

  Reinach, ii. 198.

Footnote 1820:

  See pp. 118, 127.

Footnote 1821:

  B.M. B 15, B 206, B 523; Louvre F 9; Reinach, i. 462, 1; ii. 255 =
  Bibl. Nat. 227; _Burlington Fine Arts Club Cat._ 1888, No. 108 =
  1903, No. 21, p. 102 (Andokides).

Footnote 1822:

  Athens 618 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1963, fig. 2098.

Footnote 1823:

  Reinach, ii. 128; B.M. B 24; Louvre E 609 = Reinach, i. 395 (Chares);
  and Fig. 88, Vol. I. p. 297.

Footnote 1824:

  B.M. E 476: Louvre G 54 = Reinach, ii. 7; Petersburg 1692, 1711 =
  Reinach, i. 43–4: see B.M. E 65, Louvre F 19, F 70, and Vienna 324 =
  _Wiener Vorl._ vii. 1 (Duris).

Footnote 1825:

  B.M. B 51: see under Nike, p. 88.

Footnote 1826:

  Berlin 1718 = Reinach, i. 393; Helbig, ii. p. 301, No. 77 = Reinach,
  ii. 107 (may be Ajax with body of Achilles).

Footnote 1827:

  _J.H.S._ xix. pp. 227–28; and cf. B.M. B 171 (inspection of liver), B
  641; Bibl. Nat. 400; Reinach, ii. 131, 1 (hoplite taking oath);
  Louvre G 46.

Footnote 1828:

  Reinach, i. 203 = _Wiener Vorl._ D. 2, 2–3; B.M. B 380; Louvre F 127,
  G 5: bust of warrior, Louvre F 137.

Footnote 1829:

  B.M. B 470, B 618; Louvre F 292, G 25; Engelmann-Anderson, _Od._
  xiii. 71: see Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 9, p. 106, note.

Footnote 1830:

  Berlin 1879.

Footnote 1831:

  Berlin 2304.

Footnote 1832:

  Reinach, i. 372.

Footnote 1833:

  See _Jahrbuch_, 1901, pl. 3.

Footnote 1834:

  B.M. B 658.

Footnote 1835:

  B.M. B 149, B 360.

Footnote 1836:

  B.M. B 590–91; Louvre G 70; Helbig, 292; Munich 4 = Reinach, ii. 57;
  _Jahrbuch_, iv. (1889), pl. 4. As shield-device: Vienna 332 (a
  negro); Reinach, i. 77; Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ pl. 46, 1.

Footnote 1837:

  B.M. E 285; Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 18, 1, and see p. 185.

Footnote 1838:

  See p. 179, note 1853; also Plate XXXVII. fig. 2, and _Jahrbuch_,
  1889, pl. 4.

Footnote 1839:

  _Anzeiger_, 1889, p. 93; B.M. E 759; Hartwig, p. 368, note: cf. p.
  186.

Footnote 1840:

  B.M. B 426; Berlin 2296 = Reinach, i. 428; Helbig, 54; _Mon. Grecs_,
  1885–88, p. 11: see also Helbig, _Eine Heerschau des Peisistratos_,
  and _Les ?ppe?? Athéniens_, p. 71 ff.

Footnote 1841:

  Reinach, i. 486 = _Boston Cat._ p. 137.

Footnote 1842:

  B.M. B 60; Louvre A 526; Plate XVI. (Aristonoös krater); Reinach, i.
  190, 4, 328, 6, and 459 (Dipylon).

Footnote 1843:

  _J.H.S._ xix. pl. 8; Louvre A 525–532; _Mon. Grecs_, ii. (1882–84),
  pl. 4, pp. 44–57; and see Chapter VII.

Footnote 1844:

  B.M. B 436; Berlin 836; Louvre E 735 and F 123 (= _J.H.S._ 1885, pl.
  49); _Forman Sale Cat._ 322; Reinach, ii. 19 = Baumeister, iii. p.
  1599, fig. 1662.

Footnote 1845:

  B.M. B 436; Berlin 646 ff., 831; Louvre F 145 (?).

Footnote 1846:

  B.M. B 679, E 2 (Plate XXXVII.); Bibl. Nat. 322; _Bourguignon Sale
  Cat._ 14; Louvre F 123, F 145.

Footnote 1847:

  Louvre F 62; Vienna 235; Naples R.C. 246; Munich 781 = Reinach, ii.
  126; Petersburg 10 and 86; Würzburg 337 = Reinach, ii. 141; _Rev.
  Arch._ xxxvi. (1900), p. 323; _Wiener Vorl._ 1888, pl. 5, 3.

Footnote 1848:

  Athens 969 = Reinach, i. 415.

Footnote 1849:

  See above, p. 148.

Footnote 1850:

  B.M. B 173, B 280, B 323; F 278.

Footnote 1851:

  Cf. B.M. B 184, 207, 243, 246, etc.

Footnote 1852:

  See generally Zahn, _Die Barbaren_, and Hartwig, _Meistersch._
  _passim_.

Footnote 1853:

  B.M. E 6; Louvre F 126, F 388, G 45; _Jahrbuch_, 1889, pl. 4; and see
  above, p. 177.

Footnote 1854:

  B.M. B 184, B 207, B 426; Reinach, i. 376 (?).

Footnote 1855:

  _Wiener Vorl._ vi. 5; _Bourguignon Cat._ 14.

Footnote 1856:

  B.M. B 590–91.

Footnote 1857:

  B.M. E 233; Berlin 2295; Reinach, ii. 84; Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pls.
  55–56.

Footnote 1858:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1898, pl. 5.

Footnote 1859:

  B.M. E 695.

Footnote 1860:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1892, pl. 1; Oxford 310 = Klein, _Lieblingsinschr._^2
  p. 87.

Footnote 1861:

  See p. 151.

Footnote 1862:

  _Röm. Mitth._ ii. (1887), pl. 9, p. 172; Munich 374 = Fig. 137; Plate
  XXXVII. fig. 2.

Footnote 1863:

  Bibl. Nat. 473 = Reinach, i. 131.

Footnote 1864:

  _Boston Mus. Report_, 1900, p. 72.

Footnote 1865:

  Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pls. 38–9; and see _ibid._ p. 422.

Footnote 1866:

  B.M. E 481–82; and see pp. 80, 143.

Footnote 1867:

  Louvre G 26: cf. _Mon. Grecs_, 1885–88, pl. 6, p. 11.

Footnote 1868:

  Munich 337 = Klein, _Euphronios_, p. 82; _Mon. Grecs_, 1885–88, pl.
  5; and see pp. 166, 177.

Footnote 1869:

  B.M. E 301; _J.H.S._ ix. pl. 6; Reinach, i. 63.

Footnote 1870:

  B.M. B 673–74; Athens 1088; _Ath. Mitth._ 1889, p. 45: cf. Louvre G
  93; another unarmed, G 100. On Vienna 332 a negro trumpeter occurs as
  a shield-device.

Footnote 1871:

  Petersburg 1603.

Footnote 1872:

  Benndorf, _Gr. u. Sic. Vasenb._ pl. 42.

Footnote 1873:

  Louvre G 100.

Footnote 1874:

  B.M. B 106_1.

Footnote 1875:

  B.M. F 197, 241–42 (see Plate XLIV.), 297, 301, 525; Reinach, i.
  292–93.

Footnote 1876:

  B.F.: B.M. B 46, B 382, B 679; Louvre F 2, F 216, F 314; _Gaz. Arch._
  1887, pl. 14, 1. R.F.: B.M. E 38, 49, 68, 70; Munich 272 = Hartwig,
  _Meistersch._ pl. 15, 1; Helbig, 225 and 227; Reinach, ii. 4. Late:
  B.M. E 495, F 303; Naples 2202 = Dubois-Maisonneuve, _Introd._ pl.
  45, and R.C. 144 = Schreiber-Anderson, 76, 2; _ibid._ pl. 76, 4 =
  Millingen-Reinach, pl. 8; Millin-Reinach, ii. 58.

Footnote 1877:

  See pp. 57, 105.

Footnote 1878:

  Bibl. Nat. 94.

Footnote 1879:

  B.M. E 351, E 474.

Footnote 1880:

  B.M. B 46, 301–2, 382, 679, E 66, E 454.

Footnote 1881:

  Louvre G 98; Athens 691 = _Ath. Mitth._ 1889, pls. 13–4 (Xenokles and
  Kleisophos); _Cab. Pourtalès_, 34; _Mus. Greg._ ii. 81, 1 _a_.

Footnote 1882:

  Reinach, ii. 247: see _Jahrbuch_, 1893, p. 180.

Footnote 1883:

  Louvre G 25; _Mus. Greg._ ii. 81, 1 _b_; Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pls.
  14, 2, 48, and p. 332; _Wiener Vorl._ viii. 5.

Footnote 1884:

  See Klein, _Euphronios_,^2 p. 115, for a collected list of examples;
  also the following notes.

Footnote 1885:

  Louvre G 30; B.M. E 70 = Fig. 138, E 161, E 454, E 795; Berlin 4221;
  Naples 822, 965, 972, 2415, S.A. 281.

Footnote 1886:

  It is worth noting that on the best R.F. vases mortals play the game;
  on the later ones gods and Satyrs. It must have disappeared from
  social life about the end of the fifth century.

Footnote 1887:

  B.M. F 37; Naples 903, S.A. 302, R.C. 144, 145, 2308; Berlin 2416 =
  Reinach, i. 337; _Archaeologia_, li. pl. 14; and see Vol. I. p. 452
  for a curious variant.

Footnote 1888:

  B.M. F 50, 175–77; Inghirami, _Vasi Fitt._ ii. 197.

Footnote 1889:

  B.M. F 161, F 273, F 275, F 304, F 425; F 579 = Fig. 118 (Eros).

Footnote 1890:

  Louvre G 30; _Mus. Greg._ ii. 83, 1_b_, and 85, 2_b_.

Footnote 1891:

  Louvre F 216; Reinach, ii. 329, 5: see also _ibid._ ii. 6, 304, 5;
  _Mus. Greg._ ii. 81, 1_a_; Inghirami, _Vasi Fitt._ pls. 273, 356.

Footnote 1892:

  B.M. E 14, 38, 61, 68; Reinach, ii. 4.

Footnote 1893:

  See pp. 165, 174.

Footnote 1894:

  Athens 1158; and see p. 169.

Footnote 1895:

  Petersburg 1670 = Reinach, i. 32 = _Wiener Vorl._ v. 2; Reinach, ii.
  290, 2 (??µ?? of women).

Footnote 1896:

  B.M. E 61 (Hieron).

Footnote 1897:

  B.M. E 71, 474, 484, 489, 506, 767; Reinach, ii. 94, 7; _Mus. Greg._
  ii. 84, 2 _a_; Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 11 and p. 41; _Wiener
  Vorl._ viii. 5 (Brygos in Würzburg).

Footnote 1898:

  B.M. E 33, 46, 53, 508; _Forman Sale Cat._ 317; Reinach, ii. 120.

Footnote 1899:

  B.M. B 299; and see above, p. 169.

Footnote 1900:

  B.M. E 137, E 488; Reinach, ii. 68, 290, 301, 313; _Mus. Greg._ ii.
  54, 1 _a_, 2 _a_; 78, 2 _a_; Hartwig, _op. cit._ pl. 36, pp. 333,
  335; Inghirami, _Vasi. Fitt._ 198.

Footnote 1901:

  B.M. E 54; Hartwig, _op. cit._ pls. 11, 20.

Footnote 1902:

  B.M. E 37; Louvre F 129, G 73; Hartwig, _op. cit._ pls. 8, 11; and
  see Berlin 2265, and _Jahrbuch_, 1891, pl. 5, fig. 2.

Footnote 1903:

  See above, p. 57 ff.

Footnote 1904:

  Hartwig, _op. cit._ pl. 49.

Footnote 1905:

  B.M. B 41; Berlin 2171; Froehner, _Musées de France_, pl. 40, 2.

Footnote 1906:

  _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, iv. _passim_; Bibl. Nat. 905 is a good typical
  example.

Footnote 1907:

  See Vol. I. p. 21: cf. Christie, _Disquisitions_, _passim_.

Footnote 1908:

  B.M. E 648, 705–9, 778–83 (see Plate XLII.); Athens 1941 = Jahn,
  _Vasen mit Goldschmuck_, pl. 1.

Footnote 1909:

  B.M. E 61; Munich 819 = Millingen-Reinach, 26; Berlin 2279 = Hartwig,
  _Meistersch._ pl. 25 (very fine); Reinach, i. 207; Helbig, 218 =
  _ibid._ ii. 146; and see Hartwig, p. 238.

Footnote 1910:

  See Klein, _Euphronios_, p. 26, and Hartwig, _Meisterschalen_,
  _passim_; also Vol. I. p. 426.

Footnote 1911:

  Athens 1161 = Hartwig, _op. cit._ p. 87; Hartwig, pl. 27 (from
  exterior of kylix).

Footnote 1912:

  B.M. E 2: cf. E 16, E 27; Louvre F 129 (youth balancing amphora).

Footnote 1913:

  Athens 1162 = Hartwig, _op. cit._ p. 87; Hartwig, pl. 19, 2 (in
  Louvre), and p. 178; Louvre G 17 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1890, pl. 10.

Footnote 1914:

  Cambridge 71 = Hartwig, pl. 2, fig. 3.

Footnote 1915:

  B.M. E 46; Hartwig, p. 86; and see _Wiener Vorl._ vi. 8.

Footnote 1916:

  Louvre G 40.

Footnote 1917:

  Louvre G 70, 96.

Footnote 1918:

  B.M. E 57.

Footnote 1919:

  Hartwig, pl. 70, 1: cf. _Il._ iii. 33.

Footnote 1920:

  _J.H.S._ xvii. p. 75 = Fig. 82; _Amer. Journ. of Arch._ 1890, pl. 22,
  p. 437 ff.; _Arch. Anzeiger_, 1893, p. 9 (vase in Marseilles).

Footnote 1921:

  Berlin 2324 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1890–91, pl. 7, 1.

Footnote 1922:

  B.M. E 1; Bibl. Nat. 128; _Boston Mus. Report_, 1899, No. 21; _Mus.
  Greg._ ii. 31, 2; Reinach, ii. 225 (lion and panther fighting).

Footnote 1923:

  Gsell, _Fouilles de Vulci_, pl. 9 (in Boston).

Footnote 1924:

  B.M. B 382, E 4; Louvre F 84 and F 54 = Fig. 96, Vol. I. p. 381.

Footnote 1925:

  Louvre F 125 (ram); Berlin 4042 (bull) and 2266 (horse); Munich 1171
  and _Mus. Greg._ ii. 64, 3 _a_ (cock). Also on exterior of B.F.
  kylikes: cocks and hens, B.M. B 391–92; Louvre F 92, F 380; Bibl.
  Nat. 317; Reinach, ii. 171. Lion and bull, Louvre F 313. Apes, _Sale
  Cat. Hôtel Drouot_, May 1903, No. 71. See generally Hartwig,
  _Meistersch._ p. 565.

Footnote 1926:

  Hartwig, _op. cit._ pl. 63, 1.

Footnote 1927:

  Bibl. Nat. 175–76.

Footnote 1928:

  Munich 468 = _Philologus_, 1898, pl. 1.

Footnote 1929:

  Schreiber-Anderson, pl. 80, 3.

Footnote 1930:

  Berlin 2517 = _Coll. Sabouroff_, i. pl. 65.

Footnote 1931:

  Reinach, i. 96 = Baumeister, iii. p. 1985, fig. 2128. For the
  inscription on this vase, see Chapter XVII.

Footnote 1932:

  See Schreiber-Anderson, pl. 63, 6; _B.M. Cat. of Vases_, iv. p. 19, F
  254–68, and references there given; also Vol. I. pp. 194, 487, Plate
  XLIV.

Footnote 1933:

  B.M. B 57, B 58; Louvre E 703 = Reinach, ii. 92; Bibl. Nat. 172.

Footnote 1934:

  B.M. B 28, B 31; and see p. 185, note 1925.

Footnote 1935:

  Rayet and Collignon, p. 330 = Reinach, i. 503: see p. 273.

Footnote 1936:

  R.F. kalpis in Louvre; _Anzeiger_, 1889, p. 93; B.M. E 759: see for
  this and the following subjects Hartwig, _Meistersch._, p. 368, note;
  also p. 177 above.

Footnote 1937:

  Louvre F 127 (Pamphaios).

Footnote 1938:

  Munich 1170.

Footnote 1939:

  Munich 1223.

Footnote 1940:

  B.M. E 771.

Footnote 1941:

  In South Kensington Museum.




                              CHAPTER XVI
           _DETAILS OF TYPES, ARRANGEMENT, AND ORNAMENTATION_

    Distinctions of types—Costume and attributes of individual
      deities—Personifications—Heroes—Monsters—Personages in
      every-day life—Armour and shield-devices—Dress and
      ornaments—Physiognomical expression on vases—Landscape and
      architecture—Arrangement of subjects—Ornamental
      patterns—Maeander, circles, and other geometrical
      patterns—Floral patterns—Lotos and palmettes—Treatment of
      ornamentation in different fabrics.


It may be profitable to supplement the foregoing account with a few
general considerations, such as the attributes, emblems, and costume by
which the different figures may be distinguished, the general treatment
of the subjects at different periods, and the use of ornamental motives
in the various stages of Greek vase-painting.

                       § 1. DISTINCTIONS OF TYPES

In the earlier vase-paintings deities are often not only
indistinguishable from one another, but even from kings and other
mortal personages, attributes and subtle distinctions of costume being
ignored; and in the period of decline a similar tendency may be noted,
due in this case not so much to confusion of ideas as to a general
carelessness of execution and indifference to the meaning of the
subject. In the former vases it was, doubtless, largely the result of
conventionality and limitation in the free expression of forms; but it
is a peculiarity not confined to painting, and may be observed not only
in the minor arts, in terracotta and bronze figurines, but even in
sculpture of a more exalted kind—as, for instance, in the female
statues from the Athenian Acropolis. Thus, all the deities are draped,
and their costume differs in no respect from that worn by mortals; all
alike wear the chiton, himation, or chlamys, and ornamentation of the
drapery with embroidered patterns is no mark of distinction. It is only
as the art advances in the B.F. period that the necessity for
differentiation makes itself felt, and each deity becomes
individualised by some peculiarity of costume or special attribute
which makes it possible to recognise them without difficulty. To give a
brief survey of these characteristic marks will be the object of the
following pages.[1942]

Among the Olympian deities, _Zeus_ is generally bearded, and fully
draped in long chiton and mantle; on R.F. vases he wears a
laurel-wreath. He fights the giants from his chariot, but otherwise
is standing, or seated on a throne, which is often carved and
ornamented with figures.[1943] He usually holds a thunderbolt, or a
sceptre, surmounted by an eagle or otherwise ornamented; in one or
two cases the termination is in the form of a lotos-bud, curiously
conventionalised.[1944] _Hera_ is distinguished by the _stephane_ or
broad diadem, often ornamented, and covered with the bridal veil, the
edge of which she draws forward with one hand in the attitude
considered typical of brides. Her sceptre is sometimes surmounted by
her emblem—the cuckoo.

_Poseidon_, on the Corinthian and Attic B.F. vases—on which he is but a
rare figure—is often hardly to be distinguished from Zeus, the
approximation of the types extending even to their emblems. Where he
holds in addition a dolphin or tunny-fish, there is, of course, no
doubt as to his presence; nor, again, in the Gigantomachia, where he
wields a rock (see p. 13, and Fig. 112); but his trident, which
subsequently becomes the unmistakable evidence of his identity, often
assumes (as on the Corinthian pinakes) the form of a sceptre ending in
a lotos-bud,[1945] which is typical of Zeus, and, indeed, of Olympian
deities generally. The other sea-deities are, however, of a more
clearly defined type. The essential feature of _Triton_ is the
fish-tail in which his body terminates. _Nereus_, on the other hand, is
represented as an old man, bald and grey-bearded. In this form he
contends with Herakles (see p. 101), and it may be that the
differentiation was necessary to avoid confusion with the Triton type.
As attributes he often holds a dolphin or tunny-fish, and a trident or
sceptre. The winged deity with a long sinuous fish-tail seen on early
Corinthian vases is probably _Palaemon_ (see p. 26); but in one case
this deity is feminine.[1946] _Amphitrite_, as the feminine consort of
Poseidon, holds a sceptre or tunny-fish, and _Thetis_ and the _Nereids_
appear in ordinary female form. The former, however, in her struggles
with Peleus, is accompanied by lions, serpents, and other animals,
which indicate the transformations she was supposed to assume. _Skylla_
appears as described in Homer, with fish-tail and the fore-parts of
dogs issuing from her waist, which is encircled by a fringe of scales
or feathers.

_Demeter_ and _Persephone_ are not always distinguishable from one
another, both having the same attributes—a torch or ears of corn (cf.
Plate LI.). Their identification depends rather on the nature of their
respective actions in the scenes where they appear. _Triptolemos_ is
always seen in his winged two-wheeled car (sometimes drawn by
serpents), and usually holds ears of corn or a libation-bowl; on B.F.
vases he is bearded. The other Eleusinian deities, on the late R.F.
vases where they occur, are marked by the large torches which they hold.

_Apollo_ on the B.F. vases almost invariably occurs in his character of
Kitharoidos,[1947] the lyre which he holds being of the form known as
_kithara_ (on later vases it is a _chelys_); he is therefore, like all
musicians, fully draped in long chiton, and his hair falls in curls on
his shoulders, or is gathered in a ???ß????. Unlike most gods, he is at
all times youthful and beardless.[1948] He is also represented holding
a laurel-branch, shooting an arrow from his bow, or riding on a swan or
Gryphon, or accompanied by a hind or other animal. His sister _Artemis_
is draped in long chiton and mantle, and often wears a high cap on B.F.
vases; it is not until the later R.F. period that she appears in
hunting costume, with knotted-up hair, short chiton, and high laced-up
hunting-boots or _endromides_; sometimes also a fawn-skin. She is
usually distinguished by her bow and arrows, and is accompanied by a
hound, deer, goat, or other animal.[1949]

_Hephaistos_ is usually bearded,[1950] and often appears in the
workman’s dress of the _exomis_ or short chiton covering one shoulder,
and high conical cap; his craft is further symbolised by a hammer or
tongs, or by the axe with which he brings Athena forth from the head of
Zeus. In the Gigantomachia he uses his tongs with savage violence
against an unfortunate opponent (see p. 14). _Ares_ is the typical
Greek fully-armed warrior, bearded, with helmet, short chiton, cuirass,
and greaves, sword, spear, and shield; but is not otherwise to be
distinguished. _Hermes_, as the messenger of the gods, appears in
appropriate costume of chlamys and _petasos_ (the Greek
travelling-hat), and carrying the caduceus or herald’s staff; he
usually wears high boots, and on the earlier vases a short chiton in
addition. He is occasionally winged, but it is more usual to find the
wings attached to his petasos or boots. On B.F. vases he is always
bearded, but not after the sixth century. _Hestia_, who but rarely
occurs on vases, forms a pair to Hermes in assemblies of the gods, but
is not distinguished further than by the Olympian lotos-sceptre.

_Athena_ on the earlier B.F. vases is not always distinguished from an
ordinary woman; later, the helmet, spear, shield, and aegis become
inseparable adjuncts of her costume, the shield being always circular
in form. The spear, which is sometimes her only characteristic, is
usually brandished or couched in her right hand, and sometimes she
holds her helmet in her hand (see Plate XXXVI. and p. 40). Her costume
consists of a long girt chiton, over which the _peplos_ or small mantle
is thrown, and the aegis round her chest. The latter is covered with
scales and has a fringe of rearing serpents, and sometimes, on later
vases, the Gorgon’s head in the centre of the front. On the Panathenaic
amphorae she is always represented in the Promachos attitude, at first
to left, but later to right, brandishing her spear. At either side of
her are columns surmounted by an owl, a cock, or other emblems. On the
later specimens her figure is greatly elongated, and her drapery is
often elaborately embroidered with patterns in purple and white. Her
statue when represented is usually a mere reproduction of the living
type; but on some later vases there seems to be a reminiscence of the
Parthenos or other statues (see p. 40).

_Aphrodite_ is less individualised than any other deity, at any rate on
the earlier vases, on which she is invariably draped in the ordinary
manner. She sometimes carries a lotos-headed sceptre (as in Judgment of
Paris scenes). Occasionally she is represented armed. On the later
vases the influence of fourth-century sculpture becomes apparent in the
treatment of this, as of other deities. She now first appears nude
(when bathing or washing), scantily clad or half draped, and in
transparent Coan draperies, through which the outlines of her form are
visible. She has no characteristic attribute, but is frequently
represented with a dove or other bird. The types of _Eros_ have already
been fully discussed (p. 45); briefly it may be said that on the Attic
R.F. vases he is a full-grown nude youth with wings; on those of
Southern Italy the type is more boyish, though never the child or
_putto_ of the Hellenistic Age, and in Apulia the androgynous type,
with hair arranged in feminine fashion and jewellery profusely adorning
his person—earrings, necklace, chains, and anklets—is invariable.

_Dionysos_ is distinguished primarily by the ivy-wreath which crowns
his head; he generally wears a long chiton and mantle, but on the
latest vases is frequently nude. On all B.F. vases, and often on those
of the R.F. period, he is bearded, and it is only on those of Southern
Italy that he appears as a somewhat effeminate youth, half draped like
Apollo, with rounded and graceful limbs. His attributes are the rhyton
or keras (only on B.F. vases), the kantharos, a form of drinking-cup
specially associated with him, a vine-branch, and the thyrsos; he is
accompanied by panthers and other animals, or swings the limbs of a kid
(??µa???f????). Usually he maintains a calm and unmoved attitude amid
the wild revelries of his followers. _Ariadne_ is undistinguished
except by her association with him. _Pan_, who only occurs on later
vases, is almost invariably represented as a beardless youthful figure,
with goat’s horns, but human legs; when, however, he has goat’s legs or
feet, he is usually called Aegipan, and in this aspect he assumes a
somewhat dwarfish and more bestial aspect.[1951]

_Satyrs_ are either elderly and bearded, or youthful; in all cases with
pointed ears and horses’ tails, and undraped except for the fawn-skins
which they frequently wear. They carry a thyrsos, drinking-cups, or
musical instruments, according to the circumstances in which they are
depicted. In Ionic art (Vol. I. p. 353 ff.) the Satyrs invariably have
horses’ feet as well as tails, and are usually of repulsive appearance.
The _Seileni_ are really aged Satyrs, depicted as bald or white-haired,
but not otherwise differentiated, except in the case of
_Papposeilenos_, who is covered with shaggy skin.[1952] The _Maenads_
are often represented (especially on B.F. vases) as ordinary draped
women, or only with the addition of a fawn-skin or panther-skin over
their chiton; they carry the _thyrsos_, or frequently on later vases a
large tambourine (_tympanon_).

Of the personages associated with the under-world, _Hades_ is usually
an elderly bearded deity of the Zeus type. He carries a sceptre, often
with ornamented top, and sometimes from his Chthonian association with
Dionysos holds a kantharos, vine-branch, or cornucopia. _Kerberos_ has
three heads only on two Cacretan hydriae and the Apulian under-world
vases; his usual number is two, but once or twice he has only
one.[1953] _Hekate_ has torches for her customary attribute, and the
_Furies_, who only occur on South Italian vases, wear short chitons
with cross-belts and have rough hair, in which and round their arms
serpents are intertwined. _Charon_ the ferryman is represented as an
elderly man in short chiton and conical cap (cf. Fig. 122), but the
grim Etruscan _Charun_ is a repulsive and savage hook-nosed demon,
wielding a hammer. _Thanatos_ and _Hypnos_, the two Death-deities, are
both winged men, but only the former is bearded (cf. Fig. 123); there
is usually nothing forbidding in his appearance. The question of the
representation of ghosts or souls (e?d??a) has been fully discussed (p.
72); most commonly they are diminutive winged figures, and in other
cases they appear as in ordinary life,[1954] but possibly they
sometimes appear in the form of birds.[1955]

_Gaia_ is represented half rising out of the earth, a beautiful but not
young woman, with long hair (Fig. 112); or, as Pandora, her head alone
is seen (see p. 73). _Kybele_ occasionally appears, with her attendant
lion, and an even rarer figure is _Asklepios_, with his serpent. The
_Eileithyiae_, who attend at the birth of Athena, are ordinary women,
distinguished by the appropriate gestures of their hands (Fig. 113).
_Iris_, the female messenger of the gods, appears winged, with short
chiton to allow of rapid movement, and carrying the caduceus or
herald’s staff; _Hebe_, on the other hand, is an ordinary woman. _Nike_
is usually to be distinguished from Iris by her long flowing draperies,
even when in flight; the various attributes usually associated with her
have already been dealt with in detail (p. 87).[1956]

Among personifications, _Helios_ is a youthful figure in a chariot,
usually with rays round his head (as on Plate LIII.); in one or two
cases his head is surmounted by a white disc; _Selene_ appears on
horseback, and is sometimes indicated by a crescent moon; where Helios
is accompanied by a goddess in a chariot, it is probable that _Nyx_
(Night) is intended (see p. 79). The _Stars_ are represented as nude
youths. The _Aurae_ or breezes appear as girls floating through the
air; the _Hyades_ or rain-Nymphs are identified by their
water-pitchers. A group of winged gods and goddesses is formed by Eos,
Agon (the masculine counterpart of Nike), Eris, Lyssa (Frenzy),[1957]
and the various wind-gods, such as Boreas and Zephyros. These are found
at all periods, but the types vary. _Eris_, who is only found on B.F.
vases, resembles the Gorgons (see below), a somewhat grotesque figure
with wings, rough hair, and short girt chiton; _Lyssa_ only occurs on
Apulian vases, and is akin in type to the Furies—in two instances her
figure is enclosed in a circle of rays of light, perhaps to express the
blinding effect of her action, and she holds a goad.[1958] _Oistros_, a
kindred figure, rides in a car drawn by serpents, and carries torches.
The type of Agon is assimilated to that of Eros on R.F. vases; on those
of earlier date (if this is the correct interpretation) he wears a
short girt chiton and holds a wreath. The _Wind-gods_ on B.F. vases
wear the petasos and high boots, and short girt chiton; _Zephyros_ is
represented as a youth; and _Boreas_, who only occurs on R.F. vases,
wears Thracian costume; he is bearded, and his hair is often rough and
shaggy. But these winged deities cannot always be identified with
certainty. Among other personifications, _Geras_ is a somewhat ugly old
man; the _Muses_ are distinguished by their various musical
instruments; and _Cities and Countries_ are occasionally
individualised. For instance, Thebes, on a vase by Assteas, wears a
turreted crown; Sparta appears as a Nymph on horseback; and, generally
speaking, their presence is usually indicated not only by inscriptions,
but by their relation to the scene depicted.[1959] _River-gods_, such
as Acheloös, appear as human-headed bulls, with horns, but the
last-named on a stamnos by Pamphaios (E 437 in B.M.) has a fish-tail.

_Kastor_ and _Polydeukes_ usually appear on horseback and in hunting
costume, with petasos, chlamys, and spears; on later vases they
sometimes wear the pileus, a conical cap which often appears as their
emblem on coins. _Herakles_ on earlier vases is always bearded, and
wears the lion’s skin fastened round his waist with a belt, the
forepaws knotted round his throat[1960]; the head covers his head like
a cap, leaving his face only exposed, and under it he wears a short
girt chiton; he is armed with his club, or bow and quiver, and
sometimes with a sword. On R.F. vases he is often nude, or only wears
the skin in chlamys fashion. On the earlier vases he is often less
characterised, and the same applies to the later R.F. vases, on which
he is frequently beardless; in many cases he is only to be identified
by his club. _Theseus_ always appears as a youth, and on the R.F. cups
usually wears a short loose chiton of crinkly material (cf. Vol. I.,
Frontisp.); his arms are a sword, or sometimes a club. _Perseus_ wears
the winged petasos or cap of darkness and high boots (the shoes of
swiftness), sometimes winged; he carries the wallet or ??ß?s??, and
sometimes the ??p? or curved sword with which he slew Medusa. _Pelops_
on the Apulian vases is usually characterised as an Oriental, with
richly embroidered costume and a tiara or embroidered cap. The Homeric
heroes are only to be identified by inscriptions, or by the actions in
which they take part, but _Paris_ is usually in Oriental costume; in
Judgment scenes he holds a lyre, but when he takes part in combats he
is attired as an archer, with bow and quiver, Phrygian cap, jerkin, and
trousers. _Kekrops_, the mythical king of Athens, usually ends in a
serpent’s tail, to denote his autochthonous origin; _Midas_ has ass’s
ears; _Orpheus_ is recognised by his lyre, and sometimes wears, as a
musician, feminine costume (see below, p. 197).[1961]

Of other mythological types the _Amazons_ are, of course, always armed,
frequently in the Oriental fashion, with Phrygian cap or _kidaris_ and
trousers; their weapons are the crescent-shaped shield or _pelta_, and
a peculiar type of battle-axe, the _sagaris_. The _Giants_ on B.F.
vases are ordinary armed warriors, not even of exceptional size, but in
later times they often end in serpents, as on the Pergamene frieze.
_Typhon_ appears in this form on a Chalcidian vase.[1962] _Geryon_ is
represented in the manner described by Pausanias (vi. 19, 1), as “three
men joined together,” with distinctive arms and legs; on Chalcidian
vases he has four wings, and is only triple from the waist upwards. The
_Centaurs_ on the more archaic vases, as on those of Ionia, appear as
men with the body and hind legs of a horse attached behind; by the
middle of the sixth century they appear in the familiar form of a human
bust conjoined with a horse’s body. The _Gorgons_ are always rendered
in grotesque fashion, with grinning faces and dishevelled hair
intertwined with serpents; they wear short girt chitons and high winged
boots, and have four wings, the upper pair recurved; usually on B.F.
vases they appear in what is known as “the archaic running attitude,”
or, as the Germans more expressively phrase it, “Knielaufschema,” the
figures being represented as if kneeling on one knee. The same
grotesque type of face,[1963] with the protruding tongue and teeth,
appertains to the Medusa’s head or Gorgoneion, which is at all periods
such a favourite decorative motive on vases, either as the interior
design of a B.F. kylix, or as a medallion in relief on late vases. The
more beautiful type of Medusa head is a creation of later date than
most of the painted vases, but in the medallions on Italian vases much
of the grotesqueness has disappeared.

Much confusion at one time existed between the conceptions of the
_Harpy_ and the _Siren_, both names being indiscriminately applied to
the female-headed bird so common on vases of all periods. But there is
ample evidence for the representation of the Harpy more in the style of
the Gorgons, as a purely feminine type, with the short chiton suited
for rapid movement, high boots, and wings, and often in the
conventional running attitude.[1964] In this form they appear in one
instance as feminine counterparts of the male Boreades.[1965] The Siren
types vary at different times, the earlier Sirens frequently having
human arms.[1966] The _Sphinx_ is always a woman-headed winged
four-footed beast; sometimes on Corinthian and Ionic vases she wears a
high head-dress. The _Gryphon_[1967] is a winged lion with eagle’s
beak, and often with erect ears; the winged _Pegasos_ and the
bull-headed _Minotaur_ require no description.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Turning now to personages concerned in events of every-day life, we
find great variety of costume and equipment, especially at different
periods and under different circumstances. The vases, in fact, may be
said to supply the most instructive _locus classicus_ for Greek dress
and ornament, as well as for minor details—such as weapons, implements,
and furniture—of which they provide contemporary illustrations.

_Kings_ are usually distinguished by dignified flowing robes, by the
wearing of a wreath or head-dress, or by the sceptre which they
hold.[1968] Oriental potentates wear the costume of their country, with
lofty ornamented tiaras, or the Persian _kidaris_ or _kyrbasia_—a
peaked cap decorated with fringes and lappets. Their dress is often
very elaborate on the later vases. _Actors_ and _musicians_ both wear
appropriate costumes. The former, who hardly occur except on the
Italian vases, wear the dress of the Old Comedy, with grotesque mask,
padded stomach, loose jerkin, and trousers.[1969] Tragic actors are
seldom represented; but it has already been pointed out[1970] that in
the setting of the mythological scenes on the vases of Southern Italy
there is an unmistakable reflection of the tragic stage, especially in
the elaborate and somewhat exaggerated details of costume. Musicians
invariably wear a long chiton, over which on R.F. vases they sometimes
wear a short loose garment called the ????st?d???, embroidered with
patterns.[1971] There are also a few instances of male performers
(recognisable by their beards) in distinctively feminine costume.[1972]

_Athletes_ are invariably nude when performing their exercises, except
in the case of the armed foot-race (see p. 164); in the torch-race they
seem to have worn high crowns; on the reverse of late R.F. vases they
appear inactive, wrapped in mantles and conversing in groups. _Hunters_
wear a distinctive costume of petasos and chlamys, and usually carry
two spears. Boys on horseback are usually represented nude, and on
Ionic vases have their hair tied in a tuft behind.[1973] _Charioteers_
are always attired in a long girt chiton reaching to the feet, which on
Attic B.F. vases is painted white. They usually hold a goad in the
right hand, the reins in the left. _Heralds_ wear the attributes of
Hermes—the petasos, caduceus, and high boots, with a chlamys or short
girt chiton. _Warriors_ on the early and B.F. vases are equipped in a
fashion which tallies to some extent with the descriptions of
Homer.[1974] Their armour usually consists of a crested Corinthian
helmet, a metal cuirass, under which is a short chiton, and greaves, to
which are sometimes added the thigh-coverings known as _parameridia_.
Some peculiarities may also be noted—such as the hooked projection on
the front of helmets on the Ionic vases of Daphnae and the Clazomenae
sarcophagi,[1975] the linen cuirasses (indicated by white paint)
sometimes worn on Attic B.F. vases,[1976] or the heavy helmets with
large cheek-pieces seen on the Caeretan hydriae (Plate XXVI.). The R.F.
vases often represent the fully armed Athenian hoplite equipped in the
same fashion as the B.F.; but in these, and more especially in the
Italian vases, there is a tendency to omit much of the defensive
armour. Cuirasses on R.F. vases are often decorated with patterns of
scales or panelling.[1977] Helmets on Italian vases often assume a
local character, with conical crowns and two or three lofty
plumes.[1978]

Of offensive armour, the full equipment consists of sword, spear, and
shield. The two former call for no comment, but the shields, which are
of two forms, the circular Argive or the indented oval Boeotian,
present one feature of great interest—the devices with which they are
adorned.[1979] Investigations have failed to discern in these any
symbolical or heraldic significance; they are not appropriated to
particular personages, and all that can be noted about them is that
they usually seem to suggest rapid movement. Thus we find an eagle or
other flying bird, wheels, balls, chariots, a bent leg, a serpent,
Pegasos, and so on. The passage in the _Septem_ of Aeschylus (387 ff.),
in which the shield-devices of the combatants are described, is of
course familiar, and similar allusions are not wanting in Greek
writers.[1980] They are universal on B.F. vases, being painted in white
on black ground, and are often found on the earlier R.F. vases in black
on red; but they seem to disappear at an early stage of the R.F.
period. Sometimes they consist only of letters of the alphabet, as on a
Panathenaic amphora, where Athena’s shield has the letters ? to T; on a
B.F. vase in the British Museum are the letters ?T?.[1981] Other
peculiar subjects are a winged boar, two rams butting, a figure of
Artemis, a white-bordered square, and a ladder.[1982] Some of those on
R.F. vases are somewhat elaborate—a Seilenos,[1983] a fox eating
grapes,[1984] an armed runner,[1985] or a warrior blowing a
trumpet.[1986] A variation is when the device takes the form of an
object in relief—a Satyr-mask,[1987] Gorgoneion,[1988] mask of Phobos
(Panic),[1989] or a Gryphon,[1990] or a rearing serpent[1991]; or when
a shield is surrounded by a fringe of serpents.[1992] Shields
frequently have a piece of fringed and embroidered stuff suspended from
them, which seems to have served as a protection to the legs.[1993]

_Archers_ are depicted in Oriental costume, wearing peaked caps with
long lappets and a close-fitting dress of leather, consisting of jerkin
and trousers, usually embroidered with various patterns. The different
barbarian types which appear on vases—Persians, Scythians, Arimaspi,
and Thracians—are more or less individualised, especially on the R.F.
vases. Such subjects, indeed, were not really popular until the Persian
wars. The details of Oriental costume have already been noted.
Thracians on R.F. vases wear a long loose cloak known as the _zeira_
and a cap of foxskin (_alopeke_) with long flaps, which dress is also
worn by Boreas (see above). In the first half of the fifth century
Oriental costumes seem to have had a period of popularity among the
fashionable young men of Athens, especially the knights; and they are
often depicted riding in the _zeira_ or striped and embroidered dresses
of outlandish style (see pp. 166, 179). Egyptians are often
realistically rendered, with shaven heads,[1994] as are negroes and
Aethiopians. The latter, like all barbarians on vases, usually wear
trousers. On the vases of Southern Italy details of local (Osco-Samnite
or Messapian) costumes often appear (see p. 180, and Vol. I. p. 483),
especially in the case of helmets and breastplates worn by warriors on
Campanian vases.

On the earlier vases, down to the end of the B.F. period, there is
frequently no distinction between the dress of men and women, and to
this fact may have been due the practice of painting the latter white
to differentiate them. Both wear the long Doric chiton, with a mantle
or himation thrown over it; but men often wear the smaller chlamys over
the shoulders in place of the himation. Women, again, on the earlier
B.F. vases, often appear without the himation, and wear a long chiton
tightly girt at the waist, with a short _apoptygma_ or fold falling
over the breast. On R.F. vases the Doric chiton is sometimes worn by
women, open down one side (known as the ??t?? s??st??). Men in the
“strong” R.F. period wear a short loose chiton of fine crinkly linen.
Generally in the R.F. period there is greater freedom of costume and
variety of material and arrangement. The Ionic chiton is introduced
about 500 B.C., but its vogue does not seem to have lasted long at
Athens. In place of the _apoptygma_ women sometimes wear a loose
over-garment, known as the _diplois_. On the earliest vases men are
often nude, with the exception of a loin-cloth or pair of tight-fitting
“bathing-drawers.” Women are practically never nude on vases, except
when occupied in bathing or washing, or in the case of _hetairae_ and
jugglers.

The draperies, especially the chitons, are often richly embroidered
with patterns, represented by incising and purple and white colours on
the B.F. vases, by black paint on the R.F. On the former the women’s
chiton is often covered with a sort of diaper pattern of squares,
filled in with circles and stars, or the dresses (both of men and
women) are covered with groups of dots and flowers in white and purple.
In the late fine R.F. period and on the vases of Lucania and Apulia the
patterns become exceedingly rich and varied[1995]: chequers,
wave-pattern, palmettes, stars, egg-pattern, maeander, and all kinds of
borders are introduced. A further extension of the principle is seen in
the introduction of borders of figures, the most notable instances of
which are on the François vase and the Hieron kotyle.[1996] On the
former the technique is remarkable as a kind of anticipation of red
figures on black. Aristotle speaks of a garment made for Alkimenes of
Sybaris on which deities were represented between borders decorated
with Oriental figures, the subjects being the sacred animals of the
Medes and Persians.[1997] We may also cite the remarkable statue of
Demeter found at Lykosura in Arcadia, the drapery of which is decorated
with inlaid borders of figures,[1998] and the mantle of Jason described
by Apollonius Rhodius.[1999]

The hair of women on B.F. vases, and frequently also that of men,
usually falls loose or in tight curls on the shoulders, with a fringe
over the forehead. On the early R.F. vases men often wear their hair
looped up behind in the fashion known as the ???ß????,[2000] which, as
we know from Thucydides, went out about 480 B.C. Women, on the other
hand, have theirs knotted up and confined under a cap. On later R.F.
vases and on those of Apulia their hair is usually gathered up in the
_opisthosphendone_, or in a broad coif or fillets, and arranged in
bunches of curls in front and behind. On late R.F. vases a radiated
diadem, painted white, is often seen. Men are seldom represented with
long hair after 480 B.C., but they usually wear a wreath or plain
fillet. Head-coverings are rarely worn by ordinary persons, with the
exception of the traveller’s and huntsman’s _petasos_; but Oriental
personages usually wear a high cap of some kind (see above, under
Barbarians). Jewellery—such as necklaces, earrings, armlets, or
anklets—is comparatively rare on B.F. vases, but becomes more and more
common, until it reaches profusion on those of Apulia. Bracelets and
anklets are often in the form of serpents. Various forms of sandals or
shoes are seen on later vases, but on the black-figured the only kind
of footgear is the high boot or _endromis_, with a curved tag in front.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The extent to which physiognomical expressions are rendered on vases
varies at different periods[2001]; but it is not true, as has sometimes
been thought, that the artists altogether ignored such expressions in
their figures; it was only in the earlier phases that this was the
case, and even during the fifth century the advance was timid and slow,
much more so than in sculpture. As a rule, in the same vase all the
faces are alike, and no physiognomical distinction can be drawn between
gods and heroes, or even between men and women, except (on the Attic
vases) in the treatment of the eye. On the B.F. vases the ordinary type
of face has a long nose, with a tendency to turn up, a pointed chin,
deep rounded jaw, and large eyes, while the limbs are sinewy, angular,
and tapering. Beards of some length are invariable for grown or elderly
men; otherwise distinctions of age are hardly observed until the R.F.
period. And as in sculpture of the archaic period all figures have the
same conventional smile, so on the B.F. vases gods, heroes, and mortals
alike all pursue the actions in which they are engaged with the same
unvarying expression. The contrast of violent action and calm unmoved
physiognomy is often quaint, and almost grotesque.

Indications of expression or sentiment are, in fact, rather implicit
than explicit. They are given in a sort of shorthand fashion, just as
Polygnotos in his great paintings, by some subtle touch—by a change of
attitude or the action of a hand—indicated the emotion he wished to
convey. In the different treatment of the male and female eye there is,
no doubt, an attempt to give to the man a more lively expression by
means of the round pupil, while the oval form of the woman’s eye gives
her a softer and less intense look. The neglect of this principle on
Ionian vases, where the male eye is oval, seems to be a reflection of
the effeminate tendencies of the Ionian races.[2002] At an early date
we may observe a special treatment of the eye to represent it as
closed, in the case of a blind or dying person. Thus the Phineus of the
Würzburg cup has merely an angular mark in place of an eye,
representing the fall of the upper eyelid over the lower, or the eye is
represented as a vacant space without pupil.[2003] The mouth is
sometimes open to express pain or anger, as in the Nessos of the
Proto-Attic vase,[2004] or the quarrelling heroes on a vase in the
Louvre (F 340). It is also used to express the agony of a dying or
injured person, as on a vase with the outraged Polyphemos,[2005] with
which we may compare the dying warrior of the Aegina pediment. But all
these are rather exceptions than the rule on B.F. vases.

After the time of Polygnotos the influence of painting makes itself
felt, and we may recall that he perfected the advances of Kimon in this
respect. Not only did the vase-painters learn from him how to dispose
figures _en face_ or in three-quarter view, but they also learned how
to mark different expressions. It has also been observed that the
influence of tragedy must have been strong at this time. The krater
from Orvieto in the Louvre (Vol. I. p. 442) is a good instance of the
progress made in the fifth century in this direction. On one side of
the vase (see Fig. 103, _ibid._) we have a dying Niobid and a youth
with face to the front and eyes closing; on the other, in the
Argonautic scene, a warrior holding his knees, with lower lip fallen,
giving him a melancholy expression, and Herakles with a face of
sadness, marked by wrinkles. Other figures show exactly in what
direction they are looking (compare Kimon’s figures “looking down or
upwards”).[2006] In the later developments of the Apulian vases, with
their scenes drawn from tragic themes and represented in such dramatic
fashion, there is plenty of ability to represent emotion, and in
several cases it is accurately expressed, as in some of the scenes from
the sack of Troy. But in other cases, as on the Assteas vase in Madrid
(Fig. 107), much of the old quaintness and grotesqueness is apparent.

                  *       *       *       *       *

It is also necessary to treat of the methods adopted by the artist for
indicating locality or landscape in his pictures, a thing which is
often done in the briefest and most cursory manner. The germs of this
principle are perhaps to be observed (as noted elsewhere, Vol. I. p.
312) in the floral ground-ornaments of the Corinthian and other early
vases. In the more developed vase-paintings a sort of shorthand system
is customary, a system which in some degree probably prevailed on the
Greek stage, as on that of the Elizabethan drama. Thus a temple or a
house is represented by a column, or two columns supporting a pediment,
a wood or grove by a single tree, water by two dolphins swimming in the
lower part of the design, and so on. A notable exception is in the
palace depicted on the François vase, in which Thetis awaits the
arrival of the bridegroom Peleus. So much of the building is given in
detail that it is even possible to attempt a restoration.[2007] On the
same vase the walls of Troy are depicted, with a double door studded
with nails. In the Hydrophoria scenes (p. 173) considerable attention
is paid to the architectural details of the well-house, which was
probably in the form of a small temple, perhaps circular, surrounded by
a colonnade. The water issues from spouts in the form of lions’ heads,
and statues are often depicted in different parts of the building. The
François vase also gives an illustration of a well-house, with portico
supported by columns. The architecture is almost invariably Doric. In
outdoor scenes rocks occasionally appear, but only where they are
necessary to the subject, as in the ambuscade of Achilles for Troilos.
The branches of trees which frequently cover all the vacant spaces of
the design on later B.F. vases, especially in Dionysiac scenes, may be
mainly intended for decorative effect.

In the R.F. period more and more attention is paid to landscape and
architectural detail as the style develops, but there is still a strong
tendency to adhere to the shorthand system—a tendency which increases
rather than disappears, especially on the white-ground vases. The
artist’s object was always to make his figures stand out, as far as
possible, clear against the background, and he therefore deliberately
avoided anything likely to interfere with the desired effect. Landscape
proper, with indications of ground-lines, rocks, and trees, was only
introduced when the Polygnotan influence became strong, and the Orvieto
krater in the Louvre may be once more cited as a good and early
instance of a new development. Scenes in architectural settings are
rare, but an exception may be noted in the case of some of the late
R.F. vases with scenes in women’s apartments, where careful attention
is paid to the details of the door-ways, even to the locks and
key-holes.[2008] For the rest, it usually sufficed to indicate the
palaestra by a strigil or oil-flask suspended, or a pair of
jumping-weights; musical gatherings by a lyre or a flute in a case;
banqueting-rooms by cups and other vases hung up, or by rows of boots.
Similarly, women’s apartments are represented by a window, door, or
column, or by sashes, hoods, mirrors, wreaths, and wool-baskets
scattered about.[2009]

In the vases of Southern Italy this principle is carried almost to
excess. Not only is the old idea of rosettes and flowers scattered
about the scene revived, but the whole surface of the design is often
covered with miscellaneous objects, such as balls, sashes, and mirrors.
On the Apulian vases the use of a double line of white dots to indicate
the ground is invariable, and loose stones are scattered about where it
is intended to be rocky. Flowers grow about in rich profusion. In the
mythological scenes an elaborate architectural background is frequent,
and altars, tripods, and columns serve the same end; the _heroa_ or
shrines and other forms of tomb in the sepulchral scenes have already
been described. In athletic scenes, especially on the reverse of the
kraters, a ball, a stylus and tablets, or a pair of jumping-weights are
suspended in the air to indicate the palaestra; and on Lucanian vases
subjects of a military nature are suggested by a suspended shield only
partly visible. The “courting-scenes” on Apulian vases usually have a
representation of a window in a corner of the design.

                      § 2. ARRANGEMENT OF SUBJECTS

The next point to be considered is the method of arrangement and
composition of the figures in general on Greek vases. As regards the
Mycenaean, Geometrical, and other early wares, they may be left out of
consideration,—firstly, because their ornamentation is mainly composed
of decorative motives or single figures of animals; secondly, because
even where compositions of figure subjects are found, as on the great
Dipylon vases, the method of arrangement is still tentative and without
system. The figures are arranged in haphazard groups and bands, and all
the remaining spaces are filled in with ornament.

The first attempt at an organised method of decoration is seen in the
vases of Corinth and Ionia, and is exemplified principally in the
arrangement of the friezes of animals. Roughly speaking, there are two
main tendencies, one characteristic of each line of development—the
procession and the heraldic group. Both are essentially Oriental
(_i.e._ Assyrian) in origin, the prototype of the latter being the
familiar motive of the two animals and the sacred tree, which is so
frequently found on Mycenaean gems, and is best exemplified in the
famous Lion Gate of Mycenae.[2010] Yet this typically Mycenaean and
Oriental motive was not the one adopted by its natural inheritors, the
Ionians, and it is in Dorian Corinth that we find its reflection on the
painted vases. On one Corinthian vase[2011] it actually occurs in the
form of a conventional palmette and lotos-pattern (representing the
tree), on either side of which two lions are confronted in true
Mycenaean fashion. Later, it becomes a common device on the necks of
vases, the ornament taking the form of a decorative combination of
palmettes (see below, p. 226). Even when on Corinthian vases a whole
frieze of animals is found, there is always a central “heraldic” group
of two, towards which the whole seems to lead up, or else the frieze is
broken up into several isolated heraldic groups.[2012] But on the Ionic
vases, as on those of Rhodes and Naukratis, we have over and over again
regular processions of animals all facing the same way, or, as at
Daphnae, solemn dances of women, similarly placed and joining
hand-in-hand (see Plate XXV.).

In the developed B.F. vases the same principles are observed to some
extent, especially where friezes of animals are introduced; but there
is much greater freedom of treatment within the limits of the field
available. Generally speaking, however, all designs on B.F. vases may
be regarded as following one of the three methods of architectural
composition—the frieze, the pediment, or the metope. The frieze style,
which is seen on the shoulders of hydriae, the exteriors of kylikes,
and sometimes on the bodies of amphorae, oinochoae, or lekythi, implies
a series of figures, all turned in the same direction, but without any
central point for the action, as in processions of warriors, dances of
Satyrs and Maenads, and so on. In the pediment style of composition the
essential feature is a centre-point, in which the interest of the
subject is concentrated, as in such scenes as the Birth of Athena[2013]
or Theseus killing the Minotaur.[2014] The central group is then
flanked by figures immediately interested in the action (Eileithyia and
Hephaistos, or Ariadne, in the instances quoted; Athena and Iolaos at
the labours of Herakles); and the ends of the pediment, so to speak,
are occupied by groups of bystanders, often nameless and
uncharacterised, who are in fact only included to fill up the space
required.

The metope style, which only admits of three, or at most four, figures,
was found convenient for all the vases with subjects on panels, where
space was restricted, and also on the kylikes of the “minor artist”
class, on which a limited use of figures was preferred, and on those of
later date where the space was mainly taken up by the large eyes. But
in all these cases—friezes, pediments, or metopes—one thing was held to
be essential: the correspondence of the two halves of the design
(except in friezes), producing perfect symmetry in the composition.

Lastly, there are a limited number of cases where a single figure was
found sufficient, as in the interior of kylikes, on the circular
pinakes,[2015] and sometimes on the vases where the large eyes take up
most of the space.[2016]

Subordinate designs, bordering the main design of an amphora above or
below, or decorating the cover, are usually in the form of animals or
chariot-races, in the frieze style of composition. Similar friezes are
sometimes also found (in the old B.F. method) on R.F. vases, and even
on the kraters of Southern Italy.

The earlier R.F. vases preserve the principles of the preceding period;
and, in regard to the kylikes, the system of decoration has been
discussed in detail elsewhere (Vol. I. p. 427). In all of them we see
particular attention paid to arrangement, and the variations in the
principles of composition form one of our guides in determining the
development of the style. In the amphorae and hydriae of the transition
from the severe to the strong period the number of figures employed in
one scene was diminished, while they became larger in their proportions
and were treated with more care; the usual number on the Nolan amphora
is one or two each side. On the smaller vases, such as the oinochoë,
the number of the figures never exceeds three. Sometimes the hydriae
have an elongated composition on the shoulder, containing a frieze of
several figures[2017]; but usually the design runs into both shoulder
and body. Designs in framed panels are rare, except on the earlier
amphorae and hydriae, and on the column-handled kraters. The latter are
unique in preserving the older methods of decoration right through the
R.F. period down to the fourth-century specimens from Southern Italy.

The influence of Polygnotos and his contemporaries brought about, as we
have seen, a great change in the arrangement of the compositions, by
the introduction of landscape and perspective, and the depicting of
figures at different levels. This new development was subsequently
exemplified in the large vases of Kertch and Apulia, but in the late
fine period at Athens small vases with single friezes or simple
subjects were the rule. In the pyxides and other vases with frieze
subjects the figures are often crowded together and of dwarfish
proportions (Plate XLII. fig. 3). A return to the old system of several
friezes is seen where the figures are arranged in two or more rows
divided by bands of ornaments, as in the Meidias hydria, or the early
Apulian and some of the Lucanian vases.[2018]

The earlier vases of Southern Italy, especially those of Lucania,
preserve in some measure the spirit of the best R.F. vases, in the
arrangement of the figures, and at all times the composition is one of
the best features of these vases; but in the later examples the purely
decorative element obtrudes itself; single figures of little more than
ornamental character abound, and the old preference for mere ornament
asserts itself, the patterns encroaching all over the scenes.

                        § 3. ORNAMENTAL PATTERNS

Although by far subordinate to the subjects in point of artistic or
archaeological interest, the ornamental patterns which are employed on
the vases are by no means without their value in both respects.[2019]
They are, indeed, intimately interwoven with the subjects themselves,
which they frame in, relieve, or embellish. Numerous vases are
decorated with ornaments only, even in the advanced stages of the art;
and this is, of course, an extremely common occurrence in the earlier
fabrics, such as the Geometrical and Rhodian. Others, again, are only
ornamented in the simplest fashion, with plain bands of red left to
show through the black varnish round the body or foot. That the artist
took a pride even in this form of ornamentation is shown by the fact
that some potters, such as Nikosthenes and the “minor artists,” have
left their names on vases only decorated with simple patterns.

From the very beginning of Greek vase-painting there may be observed an
endeavour to dispose the ornamental patterns in accordance with some
system; and even though in some cases, as in the Cypriote Geometrical
vases, there is an offence against the canons of art, yet at all
periods the prevailing effect is one of symmetry and taste. It may be
thought that in some respects there is a poverty in the variety of
ornaments employed—as compared, for instance, with mediaeval art; but
it should be remembered that—as their architecture shows—the Greek
principle was to achieve the highest results within a limited sphere.
Their system was conventional, but its conventions are forgotten in the
artistic effect that it produces.

It is on the earliest vases that the greatest variety and richness of
ornament occurs; as the art is developed the ornamentation becomes more
and more subsidiary, until on the vases of the finest R.F. period it
has almost disappeared. But in the later phases it again comes to the
fore, tending more and more to obscure and finally to supersede the
subjects. To set forth as briefly as possible the growth and
development of Greek ornament, both as a whole and in the case of
individual motives, will be the object of the succeeding summary. It
will be found advisable to treat the subject in a twofold
aspect,—firstly, dealing with individual forms and their development;
and, secondly, in their relation to the decoration of the vases and
their subjects, as exemplified in the different periods and fabrics.

Various theories have been propounded as to the origin of the ornaments
found on Greek vases. Some have seen in the patterns architectural
adaptations, suggested by the ornamentation of the different members of
a temple, such as the maeander, egg-and-tongue pattern, or the
astragalus, just as the disposition of the subject is often a
reminiscence of the frieze or metopes. But this is no real explanation.
In the first place, the patterns are found on vases at a period when
they were hardly as yet used in architecture; and, secondly, their use
on vases and in architecture must undoubtedly be traced to a common
source. Others, again, have regarded them as conventional symbols, the
kymation or wave-pattern representing water, a flower or rosette the
ground on which the figures stand, and so on. Or, again, it has been
thought that they were originally derived from textile patterns, being
produced mechanically by the ways in which the threads ran in the loom,
whence they were applied with deliberate artistic intention to the
surface of a vase.

It is, in fact, impossible to put forward any one theory which will
account for the whole system of decorative ornament. As has been
pointed out in our introductory chapter, many of these patterns are not
only spontaneous, but universal in their origin among primitive
peoples; every nation has begun with its circles, triangles, spirals,
or chevrons. We are also, in regard to the Greeks, met with the
remarkable fact that in its earliest form their painted pottery
presents a very elaborate and highly developed system of
ornamentation—purely geometrical, it is true, yet none the less of an
advanced character. It is a composite system, formed partly from
Mycenaean and pre-Mycenaean local elements, and partly from the
decorative ideas introduced by the Dorians from Central Europe;
subsequently the range of Greek vase-ornament was yet further enlarged
by the introduction of vegetable patterns, the palmette, the
lotos-flower, and the rosette, which are due to the growth of Oriental
influences, both from Egypt and from Assyria.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: FIG. 139. MAEANDER OR EMBATTLED PATTERN.]

[Illustration: FIG. 140. MAEANDER OR KEY-PATTERN (ATTIC).]

In order to deal with the various ornaments and patterns in detail, it
may be found convenient to divide them under three heads—rectilinear,
curvilinear, and vegetable or floral. Of the first class the most
consistently popular is the typically Greek pattern known as the
_maeander_, key, or fret pattern. It first appears with the Geometrical
style, in which it plays an important part, often covering a large
proportion of the surface of a vase, arranged in broad friezes. Three
varieties are found—a simple battlement pattern (Fig. 139), and the
slightly more elaborate forms, Fig. 140, and the pattern given in Vol.
I. p. 283, Fig. 83. In the Boeotian Geometrical, Phaleron, and
Proto-Corinthian fabrics it is seldom found, or only in a debased form,
as [maeander] but one or two forms occur in the “Rhodian” and “Samian”
fabrics of Ionia; one of these is given in Fig. 141, and another
consists of squares of the same alternating with crosses or stars in
panels. We meet with a most interesting development of the latter
variety in the vases of the so-called Pontic class and on the
Clazomenae sarcophagi, where an elaborate maeander pattern, usually in
two rows, is interspersed with stars or rosettes (Fig. 142). It thus
becomes almost a distinguishing characteristic of the later Ionian
fabrics.

[Illustration: FIG. 141. MAEANDER OR KEY-PATTERN (IONIC).]

[Illustration: FIG. 142. MAEANDER AND STAR PATTERN (LATER IONIC).]

In the Attic B.F. vases there is a return to simplicity. Here we find
it for the most part in the form Fig. 140 above, and its usual position
is below the designs on the red-bodied amphorae; but it is sometimes
found on other vases, as above the panels on the bodies of hydriae or
oinochoae. In the R.F. period its development is most important for
determining the succession of the kylikes, on which it almost becomes a
date-mark, so regular is its evolution. This has, however, been already
dealt with in the chapter on the history of the style (Vol. I. p. 416).
After the severe period it is of frequent appearance on all forms of
vases, the kylix, amphora, krater, and pelike in particular; the usual
arrangement is a group of three to five maeanders, either of the simple
Fig. 140 type, or of a more complicated form (Fig. 143), divided by
rectangular panels or squares composed of chequers, or of crosses
(diagonal and vertical) with dots or strokes between the arms.[2020] A
curious variety of the maeander is used by Duris; it consists of a
double intersecting maeander interspersed with squares[2021] (Fig. 144).

[Illustration: FIG. 143. MAEANDER (ATTIC, 5TH CENTURY).]

The invariable place for this ornament is below the design on the large
vases, and it is usually continued the whole way round (except on the
earlier Nolan amphorae); it is also found on the R.F. and white lekythi
along the top of the design. It is always painted in black on the clay
ground.[2022]

[Illustration: FIG. 144. MAEANDER (ATTIC, ABOUT 480 B.C.).]

A similar form of maeander prevails on the vases of Southern Italy
(except in Campania); it is found on the krater, amphora, lebes,
kotyle, etc., and is almost invariable. But there is one unique variety
which is occasionally found on the great Apulian kraters, as on F 278
in the British Museum; the type is that of the pattern in Fig. 144, but
the maeander is represented _in perspective_, being painted in white on
the black, the shaded edges left in the colour of the clay.

Of patterns akin to the maeander, the so-called _swastika_ or
hook-armed cross, 16[21]swastika occurs in panels on the Geometrical
vases, but subsequently it is only found as a ground-ornament in the
field, as frequently at Naukratis, in Rhodes, and elsewhere. It is,
strictly speaking, to be regarded as a fragmentary piece of maeander,
without any of the symbolical meaning which it bears in the art of
northern nations, with whom it was the emblem of the Scandinavian god
Thor. Another pattern, 16[63]maeander or 16[90]maeander which may be
called a variety of the maeander, is frequently found as a continuous
border on early vases, such as the Phaleron and Proto-Corinthian wares,
and occasionally in the B.F. period.

Next there is the _chevron_, zigzag, or herring-bone pattern,
consisting of systems of V-shaped patterns, arranged in two ways,
either 20[15]chevron or 16[64]zigzag these patterns are practically
only found on the earlier fabrics of Greece and Cyprus, or on the
native wares of Apulia. On the incised vases of the early Bronze Age
found at Hissarlik and in Cyprus this is the prevailing motive, the
lines of zigzag being either single, or arranged in groups of four or
five parallel:

[Illustration]

On the Geometrical vases such patterns are of very frequent occurrence,
and panels or bands of chevrons arranged vertically, 20[15]chevron or
20[22]zigzag occur in many instances (Fig. 83). These groups of
chevrons or zigzags are also a distinguishing mark of the Boeotian
Geometrical fabrics (cf. Fig. 85); they occur to a lesser extent on the
Melian, Proto-Corinthian, and Early Corinthian vases, and even in the
Chalcidian fabrics. They are either employed as ground-ornaments to
fill in spaces, or as panels forming part of the subsidiary decoration.
A variation, or rather development, of the chevron, sometimes employed
as a ground-ornament on early Ionic vases, is composed of a cross,
22[21]cross with sets of chevrons between the arms.

[Illustration: FIG. 145. NET-PATTERN.]

Diagonally or directly _intersecting lines_ form another universal
element of early decoration, varying from a simple arrangement of cross
lines 22[54]mesh to an elaborate diaper-pattern, and in such forms
found even in later times. Beginning with the simple intersecting
lines, or bands filled in with hatching, of the primitive incised
vases, further developed in the white slip ware of Cyprus (Vol. I. p.
243), we next come to their use on the vases of the Geometrical period,
both in Greece and in Cyprus. The variety of these patterns is so great
that they can hardly be described in any detail; the usual method of
treatment is in a band or panel of lozenges, squares, or triangles,
filled in with a reticular pattern formed by the short intersecting
lines. Sometimes dots are inserted in the spaces to enrich the general
effect. Some very good examples of these patterns are to be seen in the
Geometrical vases of Apulia (p. 327). In the B.F. period plain bands or
panels of intersecting lines are not infrequent; sometimes small
amphorae or lekythi are decorated entirely in this fashion.[2023] A
variation of the motive is the border of network which often surrounds
the panels on hydriae or oinochoae, in which the points of intersection
are ornamented with studs, resembling the knots of a net (Fig. 145). It
is also frequently found on the later Corinthian vases.
_Chequer-patterns_ are often used with great effect, at all periods
from the Geometrical vases down to the fourth century, their usual
position being on the neck of a vase (Fig. 146).[2024]

[Illustration: FIG. 146. CHEQUER-PATTERN.]

[Illustration: FIG. 147. PROTOTYPE OF GEOMETRICAL TANGENT-CIRCLES.]

The _circle_ as an ornament occurs comparatively rarely, but there are
two exceptions. In the Geometrical vases we find a use both of
concentric circles and of rows of single circles joined by straight
lines forming tangents, a motive which is obviously derived from the
Mycenaean spirals (Fig. 147). Secondly, in the Graeco-Phoenician
pottery of Cyprus, especially in its later phases and in the smaller
vases, such as the jugs and lekythi, the decoration is practically
confined to systems of concentric circles, of a character quite
peculiar to this fabric.[2025] The chief feature of these systems is
that the ordinary principles of vase-decoration are entirely ignored,
and the circles, arranged in series of five or six, forming a band
about three-quarters of an inch in width, are placed not only at right
angles to the axis of the vase, but parallel to it. The illustrations
in Plate XIII. and Fig. 75 (Vol. I. p. 251) will give a better idea of
the arrangement than any description; it is clear that the circles were
easily produced by applying a fine brush to the vase while turning on
the wheel, first in its natural position and then on its side.
Artistically, of course, the principle is a wrong one, and this is most
glaringly conspicuous in the barrel-shaped lekythi, in which the axis
of the vase is regarded as horizontal rather than vertical. Groups of
small concentric circles are also arranged vertically or otherwise on
the bodies and necks of vases.

[Illustration: FIG. 148. SPIRALS UNDER HANDLES (EXEKIAS).]

[Illustration: FIG. 149. WAVE-PATTERN (SOUTH ITALY).]

The _spiral_, which forms such a conspicuous element in Mycenaean
decorative art, appears again prominently in a class which, as we have
seen (Vol. I. p. 302), owes much to that source—the Melian amphorae.
Systems of spirals are arranged to fill the spaces at the sides of the
design,[2026] especially in combination with floral ornaments and
reticulated lozenges; and the same feature may also be observed in the
Proto-Attic vases. It occurs similarly, combined with a flower, on the
Samian or Fikellura vases (Vol. I. p. 337). In later times the spiral
passes from the sphere of inorganic to that of organic ornament, being
combined in various ways with vegetable patterns, and merging in the
tendril or volute. But it occasionally reverts to its old form, notably
in the red-bodied amphorae of Exekias,[2027] who, in place of the usual
palmette-and-lotos ornament under the handles, contrives an elaborate
system of large spirals to fill the space between the designs (Fig.
148). A variation of this is the figure-of-eight ornament,
15[34]figure-eight sometimes continuous, 15[61]continuous figure-eight
which is found on vases of the Proto-Attic class, such as the Burgon
lebes in the British Museum (Fig. 87).

[Illustration: FIG. 150. SCALE-PATTERN (DAPHNAE).]

The _wave-pattern_ or kymation moulding, shown in Fig. 149, is one
which constantly occurs in Greek architectural decoration, but on the
vases at any rate seems to be found only at a late period. On the
Campanian vases it is the regular border below the design; it is also
found on those of Lucania and Apulia. The _crescent_ is only found on
early Ionic vases, including those which have been attributed to a
Samian origin (Vol. I. p. 336 ff.), and some of the Daphnae and
Naukratis fragments, which probably borrowed it from Samos; it is
arranged in bands alternating in colour, black or purple and white.
Another typically Ionic ornament is the _scale-pattern_, which occurs
on many of the so-called Rhodian vases, and also on those from Daphnae
(Fig. 150). In the former it is produced by means of incising on the
black varnish, the alternate scales being often coloured purple; but in
the latter it is painted in outline. Curiously enough, it also occurs
in the incised form on an early group of Corinthian vases (Plate XIX.
fig. 3). Like other patterns, it can be traced to a Mycenaean origin,
being very common in that style. Subsequently it occurs but rarely, but
is sometimes employed on the neck or shoulder of a vase.[2028] It
differs from most other patterns in that it does not lend itself to the
panel or frieze, but covers a surface of indefinite extent. It is also
known as the “imbricated” pattern, from its likeness to overlapping
tiles (_imbrices_).

[Illustration: FIG. 151. GUILLOCHE OR PLAIT-BAND (IONIC), FROM THE
EUPHORBOS PINAX.]

[Illustration: FIG. 152. TONGUE-PATTERN (B.F. PERIOD).]

[Illustration: FIG. 153. EGG-PATTERN (R.F. PERIOD).]

The _guilloche_ or plait-band (Fig. 151) is characteristic of early
fabrics, such as those of Naukratis and Samos, the Clazomenae
sarcophagi (Plate XXVII.), and the small Proto-Corinthian lekythi, but
is not often found in later times.[2029] It is typically Ionic, and
seems to be derived from Mycenae (cf. A 209 in B.M.). Lastly, there is
the so-called _tongue-pattern_, which is exclusively used as an upper
border to designs. On its first appearance in the Geometrical vases it
is rectilinear in form, 15[63]tongue-pattern and formed of alternating
bars; but from the beginning of the sixth century onwards it assumes a
curvilinear form, all the tongues pointing downwards, broader, and
close together, as in Fig. 152. In the Daphnae vases and the later
Corinthian wares it is treated in polychrome fashion, black, purple,
and white alternately. On the lip and shoulders of Caeretan hydriae it
appears in an exaggerated form, painted red, with black edges, as on
Plate XXVI. In the Attic B.F. vases it forms the invariable upper
border of the designs, below the necks of the amphorae and hydriae, and
is also used as a border to the interior designs of the kylikes; here,
too, purple is often applied to the alternate tongues. Occasionally the
rectilinear form reappears. In the R.F. period it changes its character
again, and the tongues become short and semi-oval in form, with black
centre and narrow outlined edge; in this form it is usually described
as an _egg-pattern_ (Fig. 153). It is found in the smaller hydriae, and
in many other shapes above or below the designs; also round the lip of
the vase. The same form and arrangement obtain in the South Italian
vases, especially in Apulia and Lucania, except that a dot is often
placed between each pair of tongues. In some cases it approximates
closely to the egg-and-dart, as on F 179 in the British Museum. Both
tongue and egg-patterns are often ranged round the base of the handles.
The egg-and-tongue, with its variants, is a typically Ionic
architectural pattern; hence its non-appearance in Attic vases before
the fifth century. In later Roman pottery (Chap. XXIII.) it becomes
very common. The variety known as the Lesbian kymation is found in a
few late instances.[2030]

                  *       *       *       *       *

Having surveyed the various types of inorganic patterns, whether
rectilinear or curvilinear, we now come to the consideration of those
which are not only derived from vegetable ornament, but still preserve,
in greater or less degree, a naturalistic character. To begin with the
simple leaf-ornament, which is of too conventional a type to associate
with any particular plant, this occurs most frequently in the form of
of a _calyx_, placed round the lower part of the body, immediately
above the foot, so that the leaves radiate from the foot, pointing
upwards.[2031] This ornament begins at a very early period, and is
found in most fabrics, continuing down to the latest stages. It is,
however, specially associated with the B.F. period, in which it is
invariable on the large vases with a more or less marked stem, the
amphorae, hydriae, and kraters. On the smaller ones, however, it does
not occur. In the “affected” B.F. amphorae (Vol. I. p. 388) the calyx
is double, with two tiers of rays.[2032]

An arrangement of four leaves saltire-wise in a panel sometimes occurs
on the Geometrical vases, a remarkable instance of vegetable ornament
in this style (cf. Vol. I. p. 282); an analogous pattern is also found
on many early Corinthian aryballi (Vol. I. p. 314; B.M. A 1086 ff.),
the leaves not being united at the base, and usually interspersed with
reticulated or other motives.

[Illustration: FIG. 154. LEAF- OR CHAIN-PATTERN.]

Another form of leaf-pattern is of rare occurrence, and is found now
and then on Attic vases; in this small leaves are joined together in a
sort of ribbon or chain-pattern[2033] (Fig. 154). The peculiarity of
this ornament is that even in the B.F. period it is red-figured in
technique, being left in the colour of the clay with a background of
black.

[Illustration: FIG. 155. IVY-WREATH (B.F. PERIOD).]

The _ivy-leaf_ was not adopted as a decorative pattern before the
middle of the sixth century; it seems to be Ionic in origin.[2034]
Single large leaves occur on the necks of B.F. lekythi, on late Ionic
B.F. vases, and to a considerable extent on the imitations made in
Etruria.[2035] These are usually treated in a very naturalistic manner.
Double rows of smaller leaves, forming a straight wreath, constantly
occur as borders to the panels on B.F. hydriae, kraters, and oinochoae
(Fig. 155); and similar ivy-wreaths are found along the flat edges of
the flange-shaped handles on the larger panel-amphorae, as well as on
the volute-handles of kraters.[2036] These patterns preserve their
vogue in the R.F. amphorae of the earlier period, and in the kraters of
Lucania, and it should be noted that they are always painted in the
B.F. method (black leaves on red ground) except in the vases of Apulia
and Paestum. But as a rule on the South Italian vases the ivy-leaf is
treated in a naturalistic manner, with tendrils and berries, occupying
a large panel on the necks of the column-handled kraters, or forming a
border on the lip of the vase (Fig. 156).[2037] The vine as an ornament
is very rare, but there is a good instance on a late _phiale_ in the
British Museum (F 503), where it is treated in a very naturalistic
manner, forming the sole decoration of the interior; it is also of
frequent occurrence on the vases from the Kabeirion at Thebes (Vol. I.
p. 391). The pomegranate occurs only on the Cyrenaic cups (Fig. 93),
where it forms a continuous frieze of buds round the exterior, united
by interlacing lines. The acanthus is only introduced quite late
(except where it appears as an ornament on the top of a _stele_), and
is found on the necks of kraters and other large Apulian vases, forming
a rich and luxuriant mass of foliage, often with a flower in the
centre, on which rests a female head. Myrtle or olive-wreaths occur at
all times, especially on the flat rim of the mouth of a vase; the
myrtle seems to be a typically Ionic motive, and is found at Daphnae,
Samos, Rhodes, and on the Caeretan hydriae.[2038] In the Rhodian vases
it is either roughly painted in black on red, or else in red and white
on a black ground. It was also adopted at Athens—_e.g._ by Nikosthenes.
Laurel-wreaths form the regular decoration of the neck in the
bell-shaped kraters and wide-bellied amphorae of the late R.F. period
and the decadence (Fig. 157). These wreath-patterns on the late vases,
it should be noted, are either treated in R.F. technique or painted in
opaque white on the black varnish. They are often drawn with great care
and accuracy.

[Illustration: FIG. 156. IVY-WREATH (SOUTH ITALIAN VASES).]

[Illustration: FIG. 157. LAUREL-WREATH (SOUTH ITALIAN VASES).]

The history of the development of the _palmette_ (or honeysuckle), the
_lotos-flower and bud_, and of continuous foliated patterns in general,
has been skilfully treated by Riegl.[2039] To write a complete account
of this class of ornamentation would be impossible within the limits of
the present work; only a few main features can be noted, to show the
form the patterns assume at different periods, so universal is their
appearance on vases of all shapes and dates. The lotos-flower or bud
is, of course, a motive of purely Oriental origin, which found its way
into Greece probably through the medium of Phoenicia; the palmette, on
the other hand, is purely Greek, although it may possibly be derived
from a Mycenaean prototype, the _Vallisneria spiralis plant_, which is
so frequently found on Mycenaean vases (Fig. 158).[2040] They are found
not only as single motives, isolated or repeated, but also combined
together, or forming part of elaborate systems of floral ornament, with
stems and tendrils often conventionalised, which link them together,
either in continuous bands or in groups occupying a limited space, on
the neck or under the handle.

[Illustration: FIG. 158. VALLISNERIA SPIRALIS (MYCENAEAN).]

[Illustration: FIG. 159. LOTOS-FLOWER ON CYPRIOTE VASE.]

In the Graeco-Phoenician pottery of Cyprus the lotos-flower often
appears in a purely Egyptian form (Fig. 159, from C 165 in B.M.), but
it is more often combined with and almost merged in some elaborate
system of patterns too complicated to describe or define by any
name.[2041] But in Greek vase-paintings, in which it first makes its
appearance in the seventh century, it is always more or less
conventional. It is thus found on the Melian amphorae in combination
with systems of spirals[2042]; though on the shoulder of the example
given by Riegl there occurs a band of lotos-flowers alternately upright
and inverted, linked together by scrolls, where the form is almost that
of Egyptian art, except that the cup of the flower is rounder, the
petals shorter and blunter. It is obviously as yet in the transitional
stage. Next we meet with it in the vases of Ionia, especially in those
of the so-called Rhodian and earlier Naukratite styles, which have
friezes of lotos-flowers alternating with closed buds or with
palmettes, connected by tendrils (Fig. 160). A similar pattern, on an
exceptionally large scale and treated in polychrome (white and purple),
surrounds the lower portion of the body on several of the later
Caeretan hydriae (cf. Plate XXVI.). But in most of the fabrics of the
sixth century the bud seems to have been preferred to the open flower
of the ornament.[2043] Rows of lotos-buds linked by tendrils, upright
or inverted, are found on the Cyrenaic cups, on the vases of the
Chalcidian type, and on the later Ionic fabrics, such as the Rhodian
kylikes in the British Museum (B 379–81). Sometimes, too, a single bud
appears in the design itself, overhanging the scene or rising from the
ground. On the so-called Pontic vases the buds are isolated, and placed
alternately upright and pendent. In the Corinthian and early Attic
fabrics the lotos-flower is found, combined in various ways with
palmettes and tendrils, as a neck-ornament, or above a panel, or under
the handles, and also as a centre in heraldic compositions (Fig. 161);
but subsequently the buds resume their sway, and are found bordering
the panels of black-bodied amphorae (as in Fig. 162), forming a lower
border to the designs on the red-bodied, and also on the shoulder of
lekythi. These motives linger on in the earlier R.F. amphorae and
hydriae, and in the column-handled kraters; rows of buds of a
degenerate elongated form, on the lip, neck, or shoulder, are continued
well into the period of the South Italian fabrics.

[Illustration: FIG. 160. LOTOS-FLOWERS AND BUDS (RHODIAN).]

[Illustration: FIG. 161. PALMETTE- AND LOTOS-PATTERN]

(EARLY B.F.).

[Illustration: FIG. 162. LOTOS-BUDS (ATTIC B.F.).]

[Illustration: FIG. 163. CHAIN OF PALMETTES AND LOTOS (EARLY B.F.).]]

The palmette or honeysuckle ornament is not usually found as an
independent ornament before the middle of the sixth century.[2044] Its
development in this direction really belongs to the R.F. period. But in
combination it is found, as we have seen, in Corinthian and Attic B.F.
vases, and also in Chalcidian. Before the Athenian unification of
styles it usually appears linked with lotos-flowers in a sort of double
chain, each pattern being alternately upright and reversed, as in Fig.
163; in this form it is usually found on the neck, or as an upper
border to the design. This type of ornament is favoured in the
Proto-Attic, Corinthian, and Corintho-Attic vases, and the earlier
panel-amphorae; the palmette is here regarded as the foliage of the
lotos-flower, which at first always predominates. Subsequently the
palmette gains the upper hand, as on the necks of the red amphorae (see
Fig. 165), and the lotos-flower is gradually ousted altogether. It,
however, returns occasionally on R.F. hydriae and amphorae.[2045]
Another variety, which may be described as a metope-like treatment,
compared with the frieze-like treatment above, consists of an
interlacing arrangement filling the space of a square, with two
palmettes and two lotos-flowers respectively opposed, or a symmetrical
arrangement of palmettes and lotos-flowers, connected by tendrils, as
in Fig. 164. This is found under the handle, or on the neck, or in the
middle of a frieze of the Corinthian “heraldic” type.[2046] On the
red-bodied B.F. amphorae the universal neck-ornament is a band of large
palmettes vertically opposed, linked by a continuous chain passing
between them and separated by elongated lotos-flowers (Fig. 165); this
is also found on the Panathenaic vases and the earlier R.F. amphorae.
Towards the end of the sixth century, however, there is a tendency to
drop these composite ornaments, and attention is devoted to the
palmette alone. The method of its application to the kylikes as a
handle-ornament, linked thereto by a scroll, has already been treated
in detail (Vol. I. p. 413); it first appears on the Cyrenaic cups, and
is usually employed by the “minor artists” of the B.F. period. The
chief feature of the new advance is that the palmette is no longer a
stiff upright design with straight unenclosed petals, the form to which
it adheres down to the end of the sixth century; but now assumes a more
flexible and graceful form, being encircled and linked to its fellows
by means of slender scrolls or tendrils, which thus form a series of
elliptical or oval forms capable of great variety of arrangement and
position (Fig. 166). This framed palmette is first found in the
Fikellura or Samian ware. It occurs in the form of a frieze, with
linking scrolls, on the later B.F. hydriae.[2047] The number of leaves
or petals of which the palmette is composed is usually limited to
seven. Another important and very effective improvement is achieved by
placing opposed pairs of palmettes no longer vertically, but obliquely,
forming an upper or lower border to the design (Fig. 167). These are
frequently found on the krater and hydria, and appear constantly on the
vases of Apulia and Lucania, especially on the lip. Great attention is
paid to the effective grouping of the framed palmettes in the spaces
under the handles, the object aimed at being more and more naturalism
rather than symmetry.[2048]

[Illustration: FIG. 164. PALMETTES AND LOTOS UNDER HANDLES (ATTIC
B.F.).]

[Illustration: FIG. 165. PALMETTE PATTERN ON NECK OF RED-BODIED
AMPHORAE.]

[Illustration: FIG. 166. ENCLOSED PALMETTES (R.F. PERIOD).]

[Illustration: FIG. 167. OBLIQUE PALMETTES (LATE R.F.).]

In the later R.F. period, on the other hand, there is a certain
reaction in the direction of conventional ornament, combined with
exaggeration and lack of refinement. The palmette under the handle
returns to the old erect unframed type, and increases enormously in
size, so that one or at most two vertically opposed suffice to fill the
space. In this form it appears on the bell-shaped kraters and hydriae
of Southern Italy, and especially those of Campania, surrounded by
elaborate scrolls and tendrils. In the latter fabric the palmette,
which has become almost gross and ugly, is usually flanked by two large
convolvulus or other flowers rising from the ground, and drawn in
profile (Fig. 168). In the Apulian and Lucanian vases there is no rule
as to the number of the palmettes, and sometimes the effect is
exceedingly rich and elaborate. Speaking generally, there is no
ornament which prevails so universally and in such varied forms and
systems on Greek vases, but to give an exhaustive account of all its
uses would be far beyond the limits of this work.

[Illustration: FIG. 168. PALMETTE UNDER HANDLES (SOUTH ITALIAN VASE).]

There remains only to be discussed the _rosette_, which, in spite of
its often purely formal character, may be reckoned as in its origin a
floral motive, even if it is not obvious that it is derived from any
particular plant. It may be said to have two distinct forms, the star
and the disc,[2049] the former consisting of an indefinite number of
radiating arms or leaves, the latter of a simple disc surrounded by a
row of dots. In both forms it is found at all periods, not so much as a
formal pattern in bands or groups, but as a decorative adjunct to
surfaces within or without the field of the design, especially as a
ground ornament on Ionic, Corinthian, and other early fabrics, or as an
embellishment of the draperies worn by the figures on the vases.

[Illustration: FIG. 169. ROSETTE (RHODIAN).]

[Illustration: FIG. 170. ROSETTE (APULIAN).]

In the Mycenaean period it is found usually in the dotted disc form, as
a ground ornament, but the star form is by no means rare.[2050] In
later Cypriote pottery the star-shaped rosette sometimes occurs in a
band of ornament, left in the colour of the clay on a black
background[2051]; but the other type is more common in conjunction with
the concentric circles. In Hellenic pottery the rosette at first
appears exclusively as a ground-ornament, and this function it fulfils
both in Corinthian and early Ionic pottery to a large extent, as well
as in some of the smaller groups. In the Rhodian and Naucratite wares
it assumes very varied forms (_e.g._ Fig. 169, from the Euphorbos
pinax), intermingled with hook-armed crosses and bits of maeander; in
the early Corinthian wares it takes the shape of an approximately
circular flower of six petals, which covers every available vacant
space over the area of the design[2052]; these are often rendered with
great carelessness, the artist’s only object being apparently to insert
a patch of colour where it would fill in a space. Subsequently the
rosettes become both more symmetrical and at the same time fewer in
number, and by the beginning of the Attic B.F. style have altogether
disappeared. Occasionally they are employed for a band of ornament on
the lip, neck, or handles of a B.F. vase.[2053] Lost sight of for a
period of some two hundred years, the rosette springs again to life in
the vases of Apulia, resuming its old functions as a ground-ornament,
and also being employed in bands on the neck or elsewhere. It usually
appears in the form of a star-shaped flower of six or eight petals, in
red edged with white on the black ground (Fig. 170).

                  *       *       *       *       *

It may also be found convenient to treat the ornamentation of Greek
vases from a different point of view, in order to give an outline of
the decorative system adopted in each of the principal styles, and as
considered appropriate to the various forms.

In the vases of the prehistoric period, from the primitive incised
wares down to the end of the Mycenaean style, there is an entire
absence of anything like rule or formalism. The principle observed in
the very early classes, such as the Cypriote relief and white slip
wares (Vol. I. p. 241 ff.), is the imitation of other substances, of
metal or leather. The object of the artist was to cover the surface of
the vase as far as possible with decorative designs; and if, as was
generally the case, his artistic capacity restricted him to linear or
simple vegetable patterns, the utmost he could achieve was to adapt
these to the whole of the space at his disposal—_i.e._ the whole body
of the vase. Mycenaean vases, however, are usually only decorated on
the upper part, as far as the middle of the body, which was encircled
with one or more plain bands of black. Thus there remained a sort of
panel between the handles, of varying extent.

In the Geometrical period, however, a great change takes place, which
from the artistic point of view is a reaction in the direction of
formalism, but nevertheless forms the basis of the decorative systems
of later times. Here we see for the first time a regular partition of
the surface of the vase by means of bands and panels of ornaments,
without indeed any restriction of particular patterns to any part of
the vase, but yet a deliberate endeavour to establish a decorative
system.[2054] With the increase of animal and human subjects the
ornament becomes more subsidiary, merely a framework to the design, but
even in the succeeding Proto-Attic and Melian classes it plays a very
important part. In the Melian vases the system is Geometrical, but the
ornamentation is curvilinear and Mycenaean. The ground-ornaments,
however, are derived from the former source as well (hook-cross and
zigzags in conjunction with rosettes). In both these classes the space
under the handles is selected for the display of a grouping of
ornamental motives, such as spirals or palmettes, or the two combined
in a series of heart-shaped motives or panel-compositions; similar
patterns cover the neck and the lower part of the body. The
ornamentation of Phaleron and Proto-Corinthian vases is an echo of the
Geometrical system. The ground-ornaments are the hook-cross, rosettes
of dots, and bits of maeander; the bands of pattern consist of zigzags,
chequers, double rows of dots, and toothed patterns. The early Ionic
vase-painters treat the subsidiary ornamentation as they do their
principal subjects, adopting the frieze principle in most cases; the
only exception is in the Rhodian pinakes, where it is usually confined
to simple patterns round the rim, with a sort of fan-pattern in the
exergue below the central design.[2055] The ground-ornaments are really
the chief feature of Rhodian ornamentation, as in Corinthian vases. The
decoration of the Fikellura or Samian ware is very characteristic, and
demands separate mention. The patterns are highly developed, and
suggest a late date—as, for instance, the scroll, the ivy-leaf, and the
framed palmette. In later Ionic vases the ornamentation is not very
prominent, except in the Caeretan hydriae, in which the broad bands of
palmette-and-lotos ornament, and the exaggerated tongue-pattern on the
lip and shoulder, occupy a proportion of the surface unusual at this
period. Besides the typical ground-ornaments (rosette and hook-crosses)
of the earlier vases, the favourite Ionian patterns are the maeander,
the guilloche, and wreaths of ivy and myrtle. At Corinth, as we have
seen, for a long time ornament is confined to the ground-filling
rosettes, with some simple motives, such as zigzag lines or
tongue-pattern, on the mouth and shoulder, or bordering the design;
even in the later examples, when the rosettes have disappeared, it is
practically confined to the interlacing palmette-and-lotos pattern on
the neck, above the design, or inserted in the subordinate friezes of
animals.[2056] The same principle applies in the Corintho-Attic and
Chalcidian fabrics.[2057]

In Athenian B.F. vases we at last find a stereotyped system of ornament
for each kind of vase, from which there is little or no variation.
Generally the system is as follows:—On the panel-amphorae, an
interlaced palmette-and-lotos pattern or a row of inverted lotos-buds
above the panel, and a calyx of leaves round the foot, those with
flanged handles having also ornaments thereon, ivy-leaves or rosettes.
On the red-bodied, a chain of double palmettes round the neck,
tongue-pattern on the shoulder, a grouping of palmettes, tendrils, and
lotos-flowers under the handle, and a row of three or four narrow bands
of ornament below the design (lotos-buds upright or inverted, maeander,
zigzags), terminating with the calyx round the foot. The Panathenaic
amphorae have the same neck-ornament as the red-bodied, with tongues
above the panel, and thick rays round the foot; the fourth-century
examples have palmettes on the neck, with elongated tongue-pattern
immediately below. On the hydriae, tongue-pattern above the
shoulder-design, borders to the panels (maeander above, ivy or network
down the sides, lotos-buds or framed palmettes below), and calyx round
the foot. On the oinochoae, panel-borders like those of the hydriae,
but on the _olpae_ (Vol. I. p. 178) only two or three rows of chequer,
maeander, etc., on the neck above; on the lekythi, lotos-buds,
ivy-leaves, and palmettes on the shoulder, and a double row of dots
above the design. The kylix-ornament is practically limited to the
handle-palmettes of the “minor artist” class, and a circle of
straight-edged rays, alternately black and outlined, round the stem on
the later varieties (together with the large eyes).

In the R.F. period the same system of appropriate patterns for each
form of vase is in the main adhered to, but with greater freedom; there
is also a wide difference between the earlier amphorae and hydriae,
which cling to the old panel-system with its ornamental borders, and
the vases of the fine period, in which there is an absence of all
restraint on the one hand, and a tendency to dispense with ornament
almost entirely on the other (as in the Nolan amphorae). On the kylix,
the ornament is throughout confined to the palmettes under the handles
and the maeander encircling the interior design, which have been dealt
with already (Vol. I. p. 413 ff.). The earlier amphorae and hydriae, as
we have seen, have panels with borders as in the B.F. period, usually
in the older technique; those of the fine style (including the
wide-bellied amphorae) have a short noncontinuous border, such as
egg-pattern or maeander, above and below the figures, with similar
patterns on the lip and round the bases of the handles. The stamnos has
egg-patterns round the lip and handles, tongue-pattern round the
shoulder, and a system of palmettes between the designs. The red
lekythi have egg-pattern or palmettes on the shoulder, and
maeander-pattern (with crosses) above or below the design; the white
have black rays on red ground or black and red palmettes on white on
the shoulder, and maeander above the designs. The bell-krater and
wide-bellied amphora of the late R.F. period, as also those of Southern
Italy, have a band of oblique palmettes or a laurel-wreath round the
top, maeander with crosses below the design, palmettes grouped under
the handles, and egg-pattern round their bases. The column-handled
krater, on the other hand, adheres throughout to the B.F. system of
ornamentation, with ivy-wreaths and elongated lotos-buds on the rim,
similar lotos-buds on the neck, panels bordered with tongue-pattern and
debased ivy-wreaths, and the calyx round the foot. The wide-bellied
lekythi have palmettes or egg-pattern above the design, and maeander
below.

In the vases of Southern Italy there is, as a rule, no system observed
in the ornamentation; in the large vases of Lucania and Apulia it is
used with great profusion and variety, chiefly in bands on the neck. In
the smaller Apulian vases and in those of Campania it is often confined
to a wave-pattern below the designs; the Campanian hydriae usually have
in addition a wreath of myrtle or laurel round the shoulder. Generally
speaking, the large vases, such as the bell-krater, the hydria, and the
wide-bellied amphora, continue the principles adopted in the R.F.
period. The systems of palmette-patterns under the handles have already
been discussed, and for other details the reader is also referred to
what has already been said in discussing the individual patterns.

-----

Footnote 1942:

  To give detailed references throughout may be considered superfluous,
  the order of subjects followed being that of the preceding chapters,
  to which reference may in all cases be made without difficulty by the
  reader.

Footnote 1943:

  Cf. B.M. B 147; for other representations of Zeus, Figs. 111, 113,
  114; Plate LI.

Footnote 1944:

  See _J.H.S._ xiii. p. 19.

Footnote 1945:

  See _J.H.S._ _loc. cit._

Footnote 1946:

  _Él. Cér._ iii. pl. 32 B.

Footnote 1947:

  Cf. the type created by Skopas in the fourth century.

Footnote 1948:

  An exception is _Él. Cér._ i. pl. 62, where he is bearded (on a B.F.
  vase).

Footnote 1949:

  See for these two, Fig. 116.

Footnote 1950:

  Exceptions are B.M. D 4; _Él. Cér._ i. pls. 46 A, 47, 63.

Footnote 1951:

  Cf. for the two together on a vase, B.M. E 228.

Footnote 1952:

  For an attempted distinction of the various Satyr-types, see
  Loeschcke in _Ath. Mitth._ 1894, p. 521 ff.

Footnote 1953:

  See _J.H.S._ xviii. p. 296.

Footnote 1954:

  Cf. the Greek heroes on B.F. vases (B.M. B 240, B 543).

Footnote 1955:

  See B.M. E 477 and Weicker, _Seelenvogel_, _passim_.

Footnote 1956:

  See also Roscher, iii. p. 330.

Footnote 1957:

  Only on B.M. F 271 and Naples 3237; elsewhere unwinged.

Footnote 1958:

  See p. 91.

Footnote 1959:

  See _J.H.S._ ix. p. 47 ff.

Footnote 1960:

  Note that the vase-painters are careful never to represent him
  wearing the skin when contending with the lion.

Footnote 1961:

  _E.g._ Reinach, ii. 80.

Footnote 1962:

  Munich 125.

Footnote 1963:

  See Six, _De Gorgone_.

Footnote 1964:

  See above, p. 146.

Footnote 1965:

  B.M. B 4.

Footnote 1966:

  See Weicker’s _Seelenvogel_, _passim_.

Footnote 1967:

  See the article _Gryps_ in Roscher’s _Lexikon_, vol. i.

Footnote 1968:

  _E.g._ B.M. E 198.

Footnote 1969:

  See Körte in _Jahrbuch_, 1893, p. 61 ff.; also Figs. 105, 134.

Footnote 1970:

  Vol. I. p. 472.

Footnote 1971:

  _E.g._ B.M. E 270; Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pls. 65–6.

Footnote 1972:

  _Él. Cér._ ii. 16 and iv. 90–93; B.M. E 308.

Footnote 1973:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 59, B 103_{14}.

Footnote 1974:

  See Helbig, _Hom. Epos_^2, pp. 284 ff., 342.

Footnote 1975:

  Vol. I. p. 353.

Footnote 1976:

  As on the Exekias amphora, B.M. B 209: see _J.H.S._ iv. p. 82.

Footnote 1977:

  _E.g._ B.M. E 263, E 469.

Footnote 1978:

  Cf. _B.M. Cat. of Bronzes_, 2823–24.

Footnote 1979:

  On this subject generally see T. Ely in _Archaeologia_, li. p. 477 ff.

Footnote 1980:

  Xen. _Hell._ iv. 4, 10, vii. 5, 20; Paus. iv. 28, 5; Plut. _Apophth.
  Lacon._ 234 D; _Vit. Demosth._ 20; Bacchyl. frag. 41 (Bergk).

Footnote 1981:

  B.M. B 574: cf. B 608 and Urlichs, _Beiträge_, pl. 14.

Footnote 1982:

  Berlin 1698, 1852; Munich 1121; Reinach, i. 453; Inghirami, _Vasi
  Fitt._ pl. 109, 2.

Footnote 1983:

  B.M. E 575.

Footnote 1984:

  Cambridge 70.

Footnote 1985:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1895, pp. 191, 198.

Footnote 1986:

  Reinach, i. 77; Vienna 332.

Footnote 1987:

  Reinach, i. 508, 6; ii. 94, 270.

Footnote 1988:

  _Ibid._ i. 126, 181.

Footnote 1989:

  See above, p. 90, and Roscher, iii. p. 2389 ff.

Footnote 1990:

  Reinach, i. 181; Berlin 1701.

Footnote 1991:

  Berlin 3988, 3992; B.M. B 364; Reinach, ii. 63.

Footnote 1992:

  Reinach, i. 513; Louvre E 732 = Fig. 111.

Footnote 1993:

  Cf. B.M. E 167–68, 295, etc.

Footnote 1994:

  Cf. B.M. B 106_{1}, and the Busiris vases (p. 102).

Footnote 1995:

  See especially the Meidias vase and the Python krater (B.M. E 224, F
  149).

Footnote 1996:

  See Plate LI.; also Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 3; $1$2 1883, pl.
  3; 1885, pl. 5, fig. 3; _Röm. Mitth._ 1890, pl. 11 (on head-band).

Footnote 1997:

  _Auscult. Mirab._ 96.

Footnote 1998:

  Kavvadias, _Fouilles de Lycosura_, pl. 4.

Footnote 1999:

  _Argonautica_, i. 729 ff.

Footnote 2000:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1896, p. 248 ff.

Footnote 2001:

  See on this subject throughout _Mon. Grecs_, 1895–97, p. 7 ff.

Footnote 2002:

  Cf. a funerary plaque in the Louvre, where the male mourners, no
  doubt intentionally, have the oval form of eye; also Louvre F 256
  (figure of Aeneas).

Footnote 2003:

  For other instances M. Girard (_Mon. Grecs_, _loc. cit._) refers to
  Louvre E 753, 754; E 643, 808; _Jahrbuch_, 1893, pl. 1; see also B.M.
  E 440 (R.F. period).

Footnote 2004:

  _Ant. Denkm._ i. pl. 57.

Footnote 2005:

  _Anzeiger_, 1895, p. 35, fig. 9: cf. Louvre E 612 _bis_, and _Ant.
  Denkm._ ii. 24, 15.

Footnote 2006:

  See also _Mon. Grecs_, 1895–97, p. 16.

Footnote 2007:

  Furtwaengler and Reichhold, _Gr. Vasenm._ p. 8.

Footnote 2008:

  _E.g._ B.M. E 773, 774, 779, 780.

Footnote 2009:

  See on the subject P. Gardner in _J.H.S._ xix. p. 254.

Footnote 2010:

  See on this motive and other heraldic groups, _Jahrbuch_, 1904, p. 27
  ff.

Footnote 2011:

  B 18 in B.M.: cf. also the fragment from Naukratis, B 103_{17}.

Footnote 2012:

  This principle in its most developed form may be observed on the
  Chalcidian and Tyrrhenian amphorae: see Vol. I. p. 321 ff.

Footnote 2013:

  B.M. B 147.

Footnote 2014:

  _Ibid._ B 313.

Footnote 2015:

  B.M. B 589–91.

Footnote 2016:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 264, B 428, etc.

Footnote 2017:

  Cf. B.M. E 164 ff.

Footnote 2018:

  See Winter, _Jüngere Attische Vasen_, p. 69; _Röm. Mitth._ 1897, p.
  102; also Plate XLV.

Footnote 2019:

  This subject has hitherto received little or no general scientific
  treatment from archaeologists. Riegl’s _Stilfragen_ (1893) contains
  an interesting study of vegetable ornament on Greek vases; but the
  plates of Brunn and Lau’s _Gr. Vasen_, though intended to illustrate
  the system of ornamentation, are not very instructive.

Footnote 2020:

  For the various types of these patterns see Vol. I. p. 416, Fig. 102.

Footnote 2021:

  This is also found on a B.F. vase in the British Museum (B 330): see
  Hartwig, _Meistersch._ p. 220; also B.M. E 84; Thiersch, _Hell.
  Vasen_, pl. 5; _Arch. Zeit._ 1873, pl. 9.

Footnote 2022:

  The Pamphaios hydria in the British Museum (B 300) has bits of
  _red-on-black_ maeander down the sides of the design on the shoulder.

Footnote 2023:

  See examples from Cyprus and Rhodes in Cases 24, 25, 28, Second Vase
  Room, B.M.

Footnote 2024:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 205, 474, 476, 620, D 15, E 151, F 178.

Footnote 2025:

  It appears, however, to be of Mycenaean origin: cf. the B.M. vases A
  253, 323, 324, and _Excavations in Cyprus_, p. 6, fig. 6, from
  Ialysos and Cyprus, decorated in this fashion with vertical
  concentric circles.

Footnote 2026:

  Riegl, p. 155.

Footnote 2027:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 209, B 210.

Footnote 2028:

  _E.g._ B.M. E 564.

Footnote 2029:

  For its use on a B.F. kylix see B.M. B 382 (probably Ionic work).

Footnote 2030:

  Munich 810, 849 = Brunn-Lau, _Gr. Vasen_, pls. 35–6: cf. B.M. F 278.

Footnote 2031:

  Examples may be seen in Plates XXIII., XXVIII.-XXXIII.

Footnote 2032:

  B.M. B 148–49, 151, 153; _J.H.S._ xix. p. 163.

Footnote 2033:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 212, B 593, B 677, B 679: see also _Jahrbuch_, 1899, p.
  161.

Footnote 2034:

  See _Bull. de Corr. Hell._ 1898, p. 298.

Footnote 2035:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 63 (Plate LVIII.).

Footnote 2036:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 364.

Footnote 2037:

  As on the Python krater, B.M. F 149.

Footnote 2038:

  See _Jahrbuch_, 1895, p. 44, note 15.

Footnote 2039:

  _Stilfragen_, _passim_, especially p. 48 ff. and p. 178.

Footnote 2040:

  See Riegl, p. 115 ff., and Houssay in _Rev. Arch._ xxx. (1897), p. 91
  ff.

Footnote 2041:

  For the Egyptian types of lotos-flower and bud see Riegl, p. 48 ff.

Footnote 2042:

  Riegl, p. 155: see also an early Boeotian example in the B.M. (A 564
  = Riegl, p. 173).

Footnote 2043:

  Thiersch, _Tyrrhen. Amphoren_, p. 70, points out that the form of
  lotos-flower with two large points is Peloponnesian (Corinthian,
  etc.) and Ionic; the form found in Attic, Boeotian, and
  Proto-Corinthian fabrics has three principal points.

Footnote 2044:

  See generally Riegl, p. 155 ff.

Footnote 2045:

  _E.g_. B.M. E 169.

Footnote 2046:

  The varieties of this pattern should be carefully distinguished.
  Corinthian vases have a composition of lotos-flowers only;
  Chalcidian, palmettes only (cf. Vienna 219; B.M. B 34). In the
  “Tyrrhenian” amphorae, and subsequently in Attic red-bodied amphorae,
  the two principles are seen to be united, and palmettes alternate
  with lotos-flowers. See also Fig. 161.

Footnote 2047:

  Cf. also an elegant oinochoë with white ground in the British Museum
  (B 631). On a similar jug at Munich (334 = Brunn-Lau, _Gr. Vasen_,
  pl. 22) the palmettes are enclosed in heart-shaped borders. For other
  vases which, like these, have palmettes for their sole decoration,
  see British Museum, Second Vase Room, Case 28, and Laborde, _Vases de
  Lamberg_, ii. pl. 41.

Footnote 2048:

  Cf. Riegl, pp. 201–3, and Vol. I. p. 415.

Footnote 2049:

  They are distinguished by German writers as “Blattrosette” and
  “Punktrosette.”

Footnote 2050:

  Cf. Furtwaengler and Loeschcke, _Myken. Vasen_, pls. 4, 25, 28, 37,
  38; _J.H.S._ xxiii. pl. 5 (Crete).

Footnote 2051:

  _E.g._ C 244 in B.M., and Fig. 76 (Vol. I. p. 254).

Footnote 2052:

  See Riegl, _op. cit._ p. 197. He points out that the rosette,
  although Assyrian in origin, is not here used in a strictly Assyrian
  fashion.

Footnote 2053:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 51, B 197 ff.: cf. also the Proto-Attic vase, _Ant.
  Denkm._ i. 57.

Footnote 2054:

  See what has already been said on this subject in Vol. I. Chapter
  VII. p. 282: cf. also Perrot, _Hist. de l’Art_, vii. p. 165.

Footnote 2055:

  Cf. a similar pattern on the Daphnae situlae (B.M. B 105–6).

Footnote 2056:

  See generally  Wilisch, _Altkor. Thonindustrie_, p. 41 ff., for
  Corinthian ornamentation.

Footnote 2057:

  See on the ornamentation of the former Thiersch, _Tyrrhen. Amphoren_,
  p. 69 ff.; on the latter Riegl, p. 187.




                             CHAPTER XVII
                      _INSCRIPTIONS ON GREEK VASES_

    Importance of inscriptions on vases—Incised inscriptions—Names and
      prices incised underneath vases—Owners’ names and
      dedications—Painted inscriptions—Early Greek alphabets—Painted
      inscriptions on early vases—Corinthian, Ionic, Boeotian, and
      Chalcidian inscriptions—Inscriptions on Athenian
      vases—Dialect—Artists’ signatures—Inscriptions relating to the
      subjects—Exclamations—?a???-names—The Attic alphabet and
      orthography—Chronology of Attic inscriptions—South Italian vases
      with inscriptions.


The practice of inscribing works of art with the names of persons and
objects represented was one of some antiquity in Greece. The earliest
instance of which we have historical record is the chest of Kypselos,
which dated from the beginning of the sixth century B.C., and
concerning which Pausanias[2058] tells us that “the majority of the
figures on the chest have inscriptions written in the archaic
characters; and some of them read straight, but other letters have the
appearance called by the Greeks ‘backwards-and-forwards’
(ß??st??f?d??), which is like this: at the end of the verse the second
line turns round again like a runner half through his course. And any
way the inscriptions on the chest are written in a tortuous and hardly
decipherable fashion.” There is, however, no mention of inscribed vases
until a much later date; Athenaeus speaks of a cup with the name of
Zeus Soter upon it, also of ??aµµat??? ??p?µata, or cups with letters
on them.[2059]

Inscriptions on Greek vases are found in comparatively early times,
even prior to the date to which the chest of Kypselos is attributed.
This question will receive more attention subsequently; meanwhile, we
may point out some of the ways in which they have proved important in
the study of archaeology. In the first place, they were originally
among the principal, perhaps the strongest, arguments in the hands of
Winckelmann, Sir W. Hamilton, and the other upholders of the true
origin of Greek vases against Gori and the other “Etruscans” (see Vol.
I. p. 19). They are, in fact, if such were required, an incontestable
proof of Greek manufacture. Secondly, in more modern times, they have
been of inestimable value in enabling scholars to classify the early
vases according to their different fabrics. The alphabets of the
different cities and states being established by inscriptions obtained
from trustworthy sources or found _in situ_, it was an easy matter to
apply this knowledge to the vases. In Chapters VII.-VIII. numerous
instances have been given of the value of this evidence (see also
below, p. 247 ff.), perhaps the best being that of the Chalcidian
class, for which the inscriptions have been a more important criterion
even than style. Thirdly, the inscriptions are sometimes of
considerable philological value. Those on Attic vases may fairly be
said to represent the vernacular of the day; and thus we learn that the
Greeks of the Peisistratid age spoke of ???tte??, not ?d?sse??, and of
T?s??, not T?se??; that they used such forms as ???? for ????,[2060]
and p?e? for p?e (see below, p. 255). Traces of foreign influence in
the inscriptions, as in the frequently occurring Doric forms, imply
that many of the vase-painters were foreigners, probably of the metic
class. We shall also see that one class of inscriptions gives some
interesting information on the subject of the names and prices of vases
in antiquity.

The whole subject has been treated exhaustively—especially from a
philological point of view—in a valuable treatise by P.
Kretschmer,[2061] to which we shall have occasion to make constant
reference in the following pages. He classifies them under two main
headings: (_a_) inscriptions incised with a sharp tool in the hard
clay; (_b_) inscriptions painted with the brush after the final baking.
They are also found in very rare instances impressed in the soft clay
and varnished over.[2062] In later times inscriptions in relief are
actually found, sometimes painted with thick white pigment, sometimes
gilded.[2063] On the so-called Megarian bowls and on the Arretine and
other wares of the Roman period they are stamped from the moulds.
Lastly, there are the stamps imprinted on the handles of wine-amphorae,
which have been discussed in Chapter IV.

The =incised inscriptions= are of three kinds: (1) those executed by
the maker of the vase; (2) those scratched under the foot; (3) those
incised by the owner. As these represent a much smaller class than the
painted ones, they shall be dealt with first.

(1) Inscriptions incised by the maker before the final baking. These
are found on the handles and feet, round the edge of a design, or
interspersed therewith like the painted inscriptions. Generally they
represent the signature of the potter, as in the case of the early
Boeotian vase signed by Gamedes,[2064] the vases of the fifth-century
artist Hieron,[2065] and those of Assteas, Python, and Lasimos in
Southern Italy.[2066] On the vases of the latter class explanatory
inscriptions seldom occur, but when they do (as on the vases of
Assteas) they are always incised. Of their palaeographical
peculiarities we will speak later. On a vase in the South Kensington
Museum[2067] the words ??a??? ?a??? are incised and painted red, and on
the pottery found on the site of the Kabeirion at Thebes the same
process is often adopted, except that the paint used is white.[2068]

(2) Of inscriptions scratched under the foot a considerable number
remain, especially on B.F. vases. They are often difficult to decipher,
being in the form of monograms, and frequently appear to be
meaningless. In many cases they may have been private marks of the
potter or his workmen; others, again, are evidently private memoranda
made by the workman, relating to the number of forms of vases in his
batch, or by the merchant respecting the price to be paid. Commonly
they take the form of names of vases,[2069] such as [?V???] for ?d??a
(_hydria_), [???] or [???V] for ??????? (_lekythos_), [S?V] for s??f??
(_skyphos_),[2070] and so on. Many of the inscriptions give the words
in full, with numbers and prices, and we may obtain from them some
curious information.

Among the more elaborate examples given by Schöne in his valuable
monograph is one from a krater in the Louvre[2071]:

     [???????S : ?I]                ??at??e? ??

     [???? : ????  ?????S : [?]???] t?µ? t?ssa?e? ???de? ??t?

     [??T?? : ????]                 ßa??a e???s? (at 1 _dr._ 1
                                    _ob._)

That is, six kraters, value four drachmae; eight _oxides_; twenty
_bathea_ (an unknown form), one drachma one obol. The _bathea_ were
probably deep cups or ladles; the _oxides_ (_lit._ vinegar-cups) were
small vessels, probably answering to our wine-glasses.

Another instance given by Schöne[2072] is:

     [????T?? ?]                    ??????a d??a
     [???????? ??]                  ??????a? d??

or ten lekythi and two oinochoae.

Another good example is on a krater in the British Museum (E 504):

     [??????? [?]? : ????]          ??at??e(?) ?? t?ssa?e?

     [???????? : ??? : ???]         pe?????a[2073] d?de?a t?e??

     [?????S : ?? : ???]            ???de? e???s? t?e??

     [?????F? : ???I]               ???ßafa e???s? (at 1 _dr._ 1
                                    _ob._)

_i.e._ six kraters at four drachmae, twelve cups at three obols, twenty
_oxides_ at three obols, twenty _oxybapha_ at one drachma one obol.

Another in Vienna[2074]:

  [???????[S] : [?]? : ???? :    ??at??e? ?? t?µ? t?ssa?e? (4 _dr._)
  ????]

  [??T?? : ?? : ???? : ??]       ßa??a e???s? t?µ? ?? (1 _dr._ 1
                                 _ob._)

  ..[?????[S] : ?]               ???de? d??a

is to the same effect as the two preceding. On a hydria at
Petersburg[2075] we find:

                           [???????????? ??]

           ?d(??a?) t?(e)?(?) d?a?(µ??) p(??te) ?(ß????) ????

or three hydriae worth five drachmae one obol. The last example that
need be mentioned is from a vase at Berlin[2076]:

             [?] · ????? ???O : ? : ? : ????S????S : ? : ?

                 ??(?)· ??d?a µe(?)?? ?? ?epast?de? ??’

Here the letters probably stand for numerals of the ordinary kind,
denoting the numbers of the batch (?e’ = 15, ??’ = 27).

The form of the letters in all these cases is that of the fifth
century. In the case of the second, third, and fourth examples given,
it will be noted that the shape of the vase itself corresponds with the
first item. Jahn and Letronne originally held the view that these marks
were made by the potter on the feet of the vases _before_ they were
attached to their respective bodies.[2077] Schöne, in the light of the
examples already quoted, makes the ingenious suggestion that each list
represents a different “set” of so many vases of different forms, and
used for different purposes, sold together in a batch, like a modern
“dinner-set” or “toilet-set” of china. Thus we have in our fourth
example a set of six mixing-bowls at four drachmae (3_s._) apiece, ten
wine-glasses at (probably) three obols or 4½_d._ apiece, and twenty
cups or ladles at about 10½_d._ apiece.

Some of the shorter inscriptions also throw light on the prices at
which different vases were sold. For instance, 15[123]???V : ?? : ??
would denote thirty-four lekythi for thirty-seven obols, or roughly
1½_d._ apiece; 15[121]???V : ?G : ?? thirteen lekythi for eleven obols,
at a slightly lower price.[2078] Aristophanes[2079] tells us that one
obol would purchase quite a fine lekythos, just as elsewhere[2080] he
mentions three drachmae as the cost of a ??d?? or cask. This latter
statement is borne out by the inscription on a vase, [[?]·?????·???],
or five ??d?a value twelve drachmae, _i.e._ at about 2½ _dr._
apiece.[2081] An inscription quoted below shows that the owner of a cup
valued it at one drachma. Other examples of the same kind are collected
by Schöne. The cup from Cerigo in the British Museum, on which is
incised [[?]??????V????] (?µ???t?????)[2082] does not strictly come
into this category, but may be mentioned as having an inscription of
the same class.

(3) Inscriptions incised by the owner, and subsequently to the
completion of the vase. These usually take the form of the word [????]
([???]), with the owner’s name in the genitive, as [?S??????? ???] (“I
am Idamenes’”), or [?S??????? ???] (“I am Astyochidas’”), on two B.F.
cups from Rhodes.[2083] Sometimes this appears in an extended and
metrical form, as on another B.F. kylix from the same site:

                   [F????S?????S????S??????S????????]

                 F??t?? ?µ? t?? ?a??? ? ????? ? p?????a

            “I am the painted cup of the fair Philto.”[2084]

Another metrical inscription runs:

  ??f?s?f??t?? ? ?????? ??? d? t?? ?at??? d?a?µ?? ?p?te?se?? d???? ??
                             pa?? ?e??....

    “I am the cup of Kephisophon; if any one breaks me, let him pay
              a drachma; the gift of Xeno(krates).”[2085]

A yet more remarkable example is on an early lekythos from Cumae in the
British Museum,[2086] which, in the manner favoured by modern
schoolboys, invokes an imprecation on the head of a thief:

[Illustration: FIG. 171.]

          ?ata??? ?µ? ??????? ?? d’ ?? µe ???fs? ??f??? ?sta?
 “I am Tataie’s oil-flask, and he shall be struck blind who steals me.”

Others, again, record the gift of the vase, as: “Epainetos gave me to
Charopos”[2087]; [?????[S]?? T?????[S] ????[S]?[:]] “Lo, this Thoudemos
gives to thee.”[2088] A boat-shaped vase (_kymbion_) in the British
Museum has incised on it the exhortation [[?]??]?]??? ?? ???T?S],
“Drink, do not lay me down.”[2089] The owner’s name is found in the
nominative on a vase from Carthage at Naples: [???????S] [T??F?????]
[?O??S], “Charminos, son of Theophamidas, a Coan”[2090]; similarly in
the genitive with the omission of e?µ?: [?????????] [???S?O???],
???st????? ???st????; [????????O] ??e??d?µ??.[2091]

Under the same heading comes the class of votive or dedicatory
inscriptions, found in such large numbers on the pottery of certain
temple-sites, such as that of Aphrodite at Naukratis,[2092] and that of
the Kabeiri at Thebes.[2093] The usual formula at Naukratis is ? de??a
??????e t? ?f??d?t? (or t? ?p??????)[2094]; but sometimes we find the
formula ?p??????? e?µ?, where the god as the recipient of the gift is
regarded as the owner.

[Illustration: FIG. 172.]

One of the most interesting, and certainly the most ancient, of all
incised inscriptions on Greek vases is that engraved on a jug of
“Dipylon” ware found at Athens in 1880.[2095] It runs: ?? ??? ????st??
pa?t?? ?ta??tata pa??e?, t?? t?de.... “He who now sports most
delicately of all the dancers,” etc. Though probably not contemporary
with this eighth-century vase, it is still of great antiquity, and the
earliest Athenian inscription known.

In studying these _graffiti_, it must always be borne in mind that they
lend themselves easily to forgery, and that many are open to grave
suspicion. Instances of these doubtful inscriptions are the Kleomenes
vase in the Louvre[2096] and a late vase signed by Statios in the
British Museum (F 594).

                  *       *       *       *       *

The =painted inscriptions= are practically limited to a period
extending over two centuries, from the time at which the primitive
methods of painting were slowly emerging into the black-figured style,
down to the finest stage of red-figure vases. Rare at first, they
rapidly spring into popularity, being constantly found on the
sixth-century fabrics; but throughout the red-figure period they
gradually become rarer and rarer, until they drop out almost entirely.
In the vases of the Decadence they have for the most part fallen into
disuse; at any rate, they are comparatively scarce. Some of the latest
inscriptions are in the Oscan and Latin languages, showing the
increasing influence of the Romans over Southern Italy, and especially
Campania. The inscriptions always follow the laws of palaeography of
the region and period to which they belong.

Generally speaking, it may be said that they have some reference to the
design painted on the vase; at least, the majority are explanatory of
the subject represented. Sometimes not only is every figure accompanied
by its name, but even animals and inanimate objects, instances of which
are given below. On the François vase there are no less than 115 such
inscriptions. In almost all cases we can be certain that they are
original, and contemporaneous with the vase itself.

The explanatory inscriptions are generally small in size, the letters
averaging one-eighth of an inch in height. On B.F. vases they are
painted in black; on R.F. vases of the “severe” style, in purple on the
black ground, or in black on the red portions; on later R.F. vases, in
white. There is no rule for their position, or indeed for their
presence; but, as a general rule, it may be said that they are oftener
found on the finer and larger vases, and that they are placed in close
juxtaposition to the figures to which they refer. The direction in
which they are written may be either from left to right or right to
left (as generally on Corinthian or Chalcidian vases); on the
Panathenaic amphorae are the only known examples of ?????d??
inscriptions, in which the letters are placed vertically in relation to
each other. They are occasionally found on the objects depicted, as on
stelae or lavers (see pp. 260, 272), on shields,[2097] or even on the
figures themselves.[2098] Signatures of artists are occasionally found
on the handle or foot of a vase.[2099]

Kretschmer (p. 5) illustrates the practice of employing inscriptions on
vases from the art of the Semitic nations. He instances clay vases from
Cyprus with painted Phoenician inscriptions,[2100] for which the same
pigment is used as for the decoration of the vases themselves. But none
of these are likely to be earlier than the first Greek inscriptions,
and it is more than probable that the Cypriote Phoenicians borrowed the
practice from the Greeks. In order, therefore, to obtain information as
to the date of these painted inscriptions, we are entirely dependent
upon internal evidence.

The importance of these inscriptions may, perhaps, be best realised
when it is pointed out that they are one of the chief guides to the age
of the vases, and have contributed more than any other feature to the
establishment of a scientific classification of the earlier fabrics, as
will be fully indicated in the succeeding account.

The Greek alphabet, as is well known, is derived from the Phoenician,
and this is attested not only by tradition, but by the known existing
forms of the latter, the signs being twenty-two in number. The
invention of the two double letters, and of the long ? and ?, which are
purely Greek, was attributed by popular tradition to various personages
without any authority. With the question of the introduction of writing
into Greece this is not the place to deal. Recent discoveries,
especially in Crete, have greatly modified all preconceived notions on
the subject, and for the present we are only immediately concerned with
the earliest use of the Greek alphabet, as we know it.

This can be traced as far back as the seventh century B.C. on various
grounds, and in all probability the traditional view which placed its
introduction into Greece at about 660 B.C. is fairly correct. The
earliest inscriptions on the vases are certainly not later, perhaps
earlier than this (see below, p. 254). At Abou-Simbel in Egypt, Greek
inscriptions have been found in which the name of Psammetichos occurs,
and this king is generally supposed to be the second of that name
(594–589).[2101] In Thera and other Aegean islands, and on the coast of
Asia Minor, inscriptions are known which, for various reasons, have
been placed even earlier than this, and the vase with Arkesilaos, the
inscriptions on which are discussed below, is hardly later, as it can
be shown to date between 580 and 550 B.C.

Before proceeding to discuss the early inscriptions, it may be as well
to note, for the benefit of those to whom Greek Epigraphy is an
unfamiliar subject, the chief peculiarities of the earlier
alphabets.[2102] They fall into two principal groups, the Eastern and
Western, each of which has many subdivisions. Certain forms, such as
[?] for ?, are characteristic of one or the other division; but the
distinction is not so clearly marked on the vases, on which many
alphabets, such as the Ionic and Island varieties, are scarcely
represented. The vase-inscriptions fall mainly under three heads:
Corinthian and Athenian in the Eastern group, Chalcidian in the
Western. During the fifth century (or even earlier) there is a rapid
tendency to unification in the Greek alphabet, which is chiefly brought
about by the growing supremacy of Athens. This acted in two ways:
firstly, by the fact that Attic became the literary and therefore the
paramount language in Greece; secondly, by the fact of her artistic
pre-eminence, which crushed out the other local fabrics. Finally, by
the time of the archonship of Eukleides in 403 B.C., the alphabet, if
not the language, had become entirely unified, and the Ionic forms
universally adopted for public and official purposes. For private use
they had, of course, long been known at Athens; but the official
enactment of that year only set the seal to a long recognised practice.
Throughout the fifth century the old Attic and the Ionic forms are
found side by side on R.F. vases.[2103]

In the later archaic period the coins come in as an important source of
evidence.[2104] None of the inscribed ones appear to be earlier than
the sixth century, the oldest being perhaps the electrum stater usually
attributed to Halikarnassos, with the name of Phanes(?). The only
characteristic letter (the alphabet belonging to the Ionic group) is
the sign [heta] in place of ? to denote _eta_, which has not been found
on any vase with the Ionic alphabet, and therefore betokens a very
early date. Next comes an Attic stater of about 560 B.C., with the
legend [(?)??], which may be fitly compared with the oldest Panathenaic
amphora,[2105] on which the dotted [?] is also found. The earliest
coins of Haliartos in Boeotia have the curious form 15[8]curious asper
for the _spiritus asper_ or ?, dating apparently before 550 B.C.; the
succession can thence be traced through 14[10]asper2 14[9]asper3 and
[heta], down to about 480 B.C., when it is dropped entirely. At Himera
in Sicily [heta] occurs in the fifth century for the _spiritus asper_,
and is followed by the HH form, which in the West is employed down to
about 400 B.C. On the early coins of Poseidonia (Paestum) the [M] form
of S is found (550–480 B.C.), being also characteristic of Corinthian
vases of the sixth century; it also lingers on in Crete, but in Sicily
and elsewhere the [S] form of Attic and other alphabets is more usual,
until replaced in the fifth century by S. Of the specially Ionic
letters, ? (= _eta_) is found generally at an early date, as at Teos
(540–400 B.C.), and also O. At Corinth the _koppa_ ? for ? is in use
from the earliest times down to the days of the Achaean League, and
does not therefore afford evidence of date by itself, but only of a
local peculiarity, being equally universal on vases. The digamma is
only found on coins of Elis and Crete, whereas it often occurs on early
Greek vases.[2106]

It may also be of interest to note that the [heta] form for the rough
breathing occurs on the helmet of Hiero in the British Museum,[2107]
which can be dated 480–470 B.C., and that the use of ? for _eta_ and of
the four-lined [S] at Athens previous to the archonship of Eukleides
can be deduced from the well-known fragment of Euripides[2108] in which
the letters forming the name [T?S??S] are carefully described.

In the following pages illustrations of the points above noted will be
fully detailed where occurring on the vases. The annexed scheme of
alphabets used on vases (Fig. 173) will serve to give a general idea of
the variations of form in different fabrics.

The painted inscriptions on vases first appear, as already noted,
about the beginning of the seventh century B.C. The earlier
fabrics—Mycenaean, Cretan, and Cycladic—generally belong to an epoch
when writing, if not unknown, was at any rate little practised[2109];
nor have any inscriptions been found on the Dipylon or Geometrical
vases, except the incised one which we have already discussed. The
oldest known painted inscriptions are found on a Proto-Corinthian
lekythos (see p. 254), the Euphorbos pinax from Kameiros (B.M. A
749), and the krater signed by Aristonoös, which is perhaps of Ionic
origin, strongly influenced by Mycenaean art.

                SCHEME OF ALPHABETS USED ON GREEK VASES

[Illustration: FIG. 173.]

With the great impulse given to vase-painting at the beginning of the
sixth century by the development of the art in Corinth, Chalkis, and
Athens (especially in Corinth), the number of inscribed vases rapidly
increases. Among the earliest examples are those remarkable painted
pinakes found at Corinth (Vol. I. p. 316), nearly all of which have
dedicatory inscriptions, while in most cases the names are given of the
deities, Poseidon and Amphitrite, to whom they were dedicated, and
whose figures appear on them. They may be dated 600–550 B.C. The custom
of inscribing names on works of art is illustrated by other products of
this period, as we have already noted in the case of the chest of
Kypselos; and they occur on the early bronze reliefs from
Olympia,[2110] the Samothrace relief in the Louvre,[2111] the archaic
reliefs at Delphi, and the newly found painted metopes at
Thermon,[2112] as well as later on the paintings of Polygnotos.

On the Euphorbos pinax already mentioned[2113] appear the names of
Menelaos ([??????S]), Hector ([?????]), and Euphorbos ([??F????S]).
Although found in Rhodes, it is proved to be of Argive origin by the
characteristic form [?] of the ? in Menelaos.[2114] Although its date
cannot be exactly ascertained, it is probably about 620–600 B.C. It is
a vase important in more than one respect, as it may be said to
foreshadow the beginnings of the black-figure style.

The vase of Aristonoös[2115] was found at Cervetri, and bears the
artist’s signature,

            [??S????S?F????S???], ???st???<f>?? ?p??[?]se?,

in an alphabet from which, unfortunately, all characteristic letters
are wanting, so that its origin is uncertain. It is, however, as we
have said, probably a seventh-century product of an Ionian fabric, on
the coast of Asia Minor. The 14[13]halved circle has been taken by
several scholars[2116] to denote [F] as in the Phrygian alphabet, but
Kretschmer (p. 11) prefers to read it as ? 14[13]halved circle =
14[13]quartered circle We have, however, already seen that it is most
probably a superfluous letter.

Early in the sixth century must be placed another remarkable vase, the
Arkesilaos cup of Cyrenaean fabric.[2117] The inscribed names on this
vase are as remarkable as its subject; there are nine in all, two only
fragmentary. The only proper name is that of Arkesilas ([????S???S]),
who was king of Kyrene 580–550 B.C.; the others seem to be titles, such
as [??F????S], ??f??t?? or S?f??t??, “Keeper of the burdens”;
[S??F?????S], S??f?µa???, a word having some reference to silphium, the
subject of the vase; [F?????S], “Guardian”; [????F???S], and [?????],
?????[?. One word, [S??T?], st]a?µ??, refers to an inanimate object (a
balance). The dialect is Doric, Kyrene having been colonised by that
race.

Next we have to deal with a very important class of inscriptions—those
found on Corinthian vases.[2118] They are too numerous to be dealt with
in detail; Kretschmer mentions nearly fifty inscribed vases, exclusive
of the pinakes. Wilisch attributes the earliest to the latter half of
the seventh century, the latest to the middle of the sixth century; but
they certainly do not become common before the sixth.[2119] They
include several artists’ signatures—viz. Chares, Milonidas, and
Timonidas (Vol. I. p. 315). One of the most famous of the inscribed
vases is the Dodwell pyxis at Munich,[2120] representing a boar-hunt.
The figures are inscribed with fanciful names, such as [?G???????]
(Agamemnon), [????????S] (Dorimachos, or “spearman”), [?????] (Pakon),
and so on. A krater in the British Museum (Plate XXI.) represents a
similar scene, also with fancy names, such as Polydas and Antiphatas.
Another famous vase is the Amphiaraos krater in Berlin,[2121]
representing the setting out of Amphiaraos and the funeral games of
Pelias; no less than twenty names are inscribed. Of these, [?????]
(Baton) and [????????S] (Hippalk(i)mos) illustrate other palaeo
graphical peculiarities. Other good examples are the vase by
Chares,[2122] another in the British Museum with the name of the owner
([?S???? ??S], ????eta ?µ??),[2123] and that by Timonidas representing
Achilles lying in wait for Troilos.[2124] A study of the pinakes in
Berlin is also instructive in this respect. One is signed by Timonidas,
another by Milonidas, while others bear interesting inscriptions, such
as Fig. 174:

[Illustration: FIG. 174.]

                          ?e??ae???e? ???µe?,
                  “We have come from Peiraeus”[2125];
                       [??????S?????S?? ?F?????]
                     t? d? d?? ?a??e?(?)a? ?f??µ??,
             “And do thou make a graceful repayment”[2126];

and so on. The majority have only the names of Poseidon and Amphitrite,
or (? de??a) ??????e?,

In view of the palaeographical importance of these inscriptions, it may
be worth while to dwell briefly on their peculiarities. The dialect is
of course Doric, and consequently the names often differ widely from
the forms to which we are accustomed; and this is increased by
divergencies of spelling, which produce many anomalous results. For
instance, ([??S?????]) (?es??d?a) appears for Kassandra on a vase in
the Louvre.[2127] ?? is used for ??, as in [??T??] (????? = ?????) on
the Chares pyxis, and in [??????T??] (?e?ae??e? for ?e(?)?a???e?) on
the pinax already quoted. A nasal is dropped before a consonant, as in
the names of Amphiaraos ([?F?????S]) and Amphitrite ([?F??????]) The
digamma lingers as a medial (more rarely as initial) in many words,
such as ?a???, ?aµ????assa, ??te?da???, and ??da????; its written form
is 15[9]? or 15[9]? The use of [heta] for the rough breathing is
invariable.[2128]

One or two vases have been recognised as of Sicyonian fabric by the use
in inscriptions of the unique 15[16]E for ?, peculiar to that place
(Vol. I. p. 321). The only certain example, however, is a krater in
Berlin (_Cat._ 1147), with the names of Achilles ([S??????]) and Memnon
([?[?]????]). It may also be noted that an Athenian sixth-century vase,
signed by Exekias, has a Sicyonian inscription _incised_ upon it by its
owner[2129]:

                      [????????S ? ?????? ???????]

                      ?pa??et?? µ’ ?d??e? ?a??p?.

Boeotian vases never attained to the importance of the Corinthian
fabrics, though, on the other hand, the manufacture lasted longer; but
there are several instances of early signed vases from this district.
Two, of which one is in the British Museum, are by Gamedes, the others
by Theozotos, Gryton, Iphitadas, Mnasalkes, and Menaidas.[2130] They
are recognised as Boeotian by the use of typical letters, as well as by
origin, style, and dialect; such are the [Boeotian A] for A, [Boeotian
?] for ?, and so on. There is also a fifth-century vase with the
Boeotian alphabet.[2131] The Kabeirion vases have inscriptions in the
local alphabet, with a few exceptions, which are Ionic.[2132]

A unique vase, from the epigraphical point of view, is E 732 in the
Louvre, found at Cervetri, to which allusion has been made elsewhere
(Vol. I. p. 357, and see Fig. 111). It bears eleven names (of gods and
giants) in an alphabet which has been recognised as Ionian, and is
according to Kretschmer most probably that of the island of Keos. The
great uncertainty as to the ? sounds presented by this vase finds
parallels in the stone inscriptions found on that island, while in the
use of ? for ? (the older form of that letter), the four-stroke
[Fourline S] and [?], with a central dot, this attribution finds
further support. The only other islands that would fit the conditions
are Naxos and Amorgos. As instances of the confused use of ?, we have
[???S] for ?e??, but [????????] for ????ß?t?[?, while again ?f???t??
appears as [????????S]! But this confusion does not occur in Naxos or
Amorgos.

Other vases are undoubtedly of Ionic origin, but their actual home is
uncertain; they are usually assigned to the coast of Asia Minor. For
some reason, however, it is very rare for these vases to bear
inscriptions; in all the numerous instances now collected, only some
half-dozen with inscriptions can be found.[2133] One of these is the
well-known Würzburg kylix with Phineus and the Harpies (see Vol. I. p.
357); another is a vase from Vulci, published by Gerhard,[2134] which
has since disappeared. On both of these we find the characteristic
Ionic letters O for ?, ? for ?, ? for ?, ? for ?, and [S] with four
strokes. Both vases are of the sixth century, and other details attest
their Ionic origin.

We now come to a very important but somewhat puzzling class of
inscriptions, those in the Chalcidian alphabet.[2135] The number of
these is hardly more than a dozen, but such as they are they have
enabled archaeologists to establish a Chalcidian school of painting by
comparisons with other uninscribed vases. In all cases the inscriptions
relate exclusively to the figures in the designs. Among the
characteristic Chalcidian letters are the ? for ?, as in [S??????]
(???t???); the curved ? for G, as in [S????????] (Ga?????e?=G???????);
[?] for ? and [?] for ?, as in [???????S]; (?????e??); [?] for [?], as
in [S?T???] (??????); and the abnormal form of the digamma [?], as in
[S????] (?a???). [?] is represented by [FS] in one instance ([???FS?S]
= ?<p>????).

Kretschmer has compiled a list of twelve vases with inscriptions in
this alphabet, to which one or two may be added, but for a fuller
treatment of the questions involved in studying this group the reader
is referred to Chapter VII. This, however, may be a more suitable place
for a few remarks relating to the inscriptions alone.

In one or two instances the dialect alone is peculiarly Chalcidian, as
the characteristic letters happen to be wanting. In some instances, as
Kretschmer points out, the Aeolic fondness for the vowel ? is to be
traced, as in [S?????], for ??????, which finds parallels in the
Chalcidian colony of Cumae, and probably influenced the Latin language
through that means. Hence, too, the preference for the Q sound of the
?, as in English and other languages when ? is preceded by a guttural.
On the British Museum Geryon vase (B 155) there is a curious mixture of
dialect in the forms Ga??????, ???de?.

It must be borne in mind, in speaking of the Chalcidian alphabet, that
it really extended over a wide area, including not only Chalkis in
Euboea, but Chalkidike in Northern Greece, and the colonies on the
coast of Italy, such as Cumae, and this may partly account for the
mixed character of the dialect on some of these Chalcidian vases. But
although an attempt has been made to connect them with Cumae, it cannot
be said at present that any certainty has been attained as to the place
of their manufacture.

Though not belonging to the Chalcidian group, there is a vase which
must be mentioned here, on account of its inscription, which is partly
in the alphabet of the Chalcidian colonies. The vase is of the
“Proto-Corinthian” class (see Vol. I. p. 308), and dates about 700–650
B.C.; it bears the name of the maker, Pyrrhos[2136]:

                        [????S??????S???G?S????]
                    ???(?)?? µ’ ep???se? ??as??e???

and is therefore one of the oldest existing signatures.

                             ATHENIAN VASES

Under this heading are included all remaining vase-inscriptions, except
a few from Italy. Their value to us, as Kretschmer points out, is not
to be measured only by the mythological information they provide, or by
the list of Athenian craftsmen and popular favourites which can be
drawn up from them, but it is also largely philological. In other
words, they illustrate for us the vernacular of Athens in the sixth and
fifth centuries, just as the Egyptian papyri have thrown light on the
Hellenistic vernacular of the second. In countless small details the
language of the vase-painters varies from the official language of
state documents and the literary standard of Thucydides, Sophocles, and
even Aristophanes. The reason is, of course, a simple one—namely, that
the vase-artists occupied a subordinate position in the Athenian state;
they were mere craftsmen, of little education, and in all probability
their spelling was purely phonetic.[2137] Hence we constantly find such
forms as p?e? for p?e, ???? for ????, or T?s?? for T?se?? (see above,
p. 237); and even the rich potter Hyperbolos is ridiculed by the comic
poet Plato[2138] for saying ????? (_sc. oliyon_) for ??????, and
d?t?µ?? for d??t?µ??.

Another interesting point is that many of the artists who have signed
their vases were obviously not Athenians by birth. Thus we find such
names as Phintias, Amasis, Brygos, Cholkos, Sikanos, Thrax,[2139] and
even such signatures as ? ??d?? (or ? S?????) ???a?e?. It is, then,
evident that many of them were µ?t????? or resident aliens, and
consequently occupied but a humble rank in the social order of the
city.[2140] One name, indeed, that of Epiktetos, is actually a slave’s
name (?p??t?t?? = “acquired”).

We need not, then, be surprised at meeting with many un-Attic forms or
spellings in the vase-inscriptions, which sometimes give a clue to the
origin of the artist, and of which it may be interesting to give some
specimens. Kretschmer notes that these variations are always Doric,
never Ionic.

The commonest Doricism on Attic vases is the use of ? for H, of which
there are many instances, such as [?????????], ?a???e??a for
?????e??a[2141]; [????????] for ?µe??p? (B.M. E 440); [????????S] for
the Attic ??d?p???.[2142] Such forms as ???sse?? and Fe???fassa are
also clearly un-Attic. On the other hand, the names Menelaos and
Iolaos always appear in their Attic form ?e?e????, ??????. The above
instances are all from proper names; but there are other remarkable
instances, such as the use of ?a?? for ?a?? in [?????????] [????]
[?????TO?].[2143] On one of his signed vases Exekias uses the
un-Attic form [??S???], t?s(s)a?a, but, as Kretschmer notes, he also
uses ???a?? for ??????, and was probably not an Athenian. On a B.F.
amphora in Rome (see below, p. 263) occurs the form pa?ß?ßa?e?.

Perhaps the most remarkable use of non-Attic Greek on a vase is in the
case of the artist Brygos, who, as we have already pointed out, was of
foreign origin. On a kylix in his style (B.M. E 69) we find the forms
??p????, ????p???, ?????, and ????pp??. These were at one time referred
to a Macedonian origin,[2144] but Kretschmer points out that that
people used ?, not ?, for F. He aptly quotes the Scythian in the
_Thesmophoriasusae_,[2145] with his p???se?, pa??eta?, and ?epa??, as
giving a likely clue to the home of this dropping of the aspirate.[2146]

The painted inscriptions on the Attic vases may be divided into three
classes: (1) those relating to the whole vase and its purpose, such as
artists’ signatures; (2) those relating to the designs on the vase,
_i.e._ explanatory inscriptions, and those found on Panathenaic
amphorae; (3) those which stand in no direct relation to the vase, such
as the so-called “love-names” or “pet-names,” and interjections such as
“hail,” “drink deep,” etc. The incised inscriptions have already been
discussed.

The artists’ signatures first call for consideration. In relation to
their works they are fully discussed elsewhere (Chapters IX., X.), but
the present may be regarded as a convenient opportunity for some
general outline of the style and palaeography of these inscriptions.

Klein in his _Meistersignaturen_ (2nd edn.) reckons a total of
ninety-five signatures, a number which has probably been largely
increased since he wrote in 1887. These names he finds distributed over
some 424 vases, one name, that of Nikosthenes, occurring on no fewer
than seventy-seven; he divides them into four classes, as follows: (1)
masters in the B.F. method; (2) masters combining the two methods; (3)
masters in the R.F. method (including S. Italy vases); (4) masters
whose names appear on vases without subjects. These four classes are
not mutually exclusive, as names in (1) and (3) appear again in (2) and
(4).

The form which the signature takes is usually (1)—

                   ? de??a ?p???se? (of the potter);

or (2)—

                       ???a?e? (of the painter);

or (3), the two combined, either under one name, as—

                      ?????a? ???a?e ??p???s? µe;

or (4), with separate names, as on the François vase—

[Illustration: FIG. 175.]

               ???t?a? µ’ ???a?e? ????t?µ?? µ’ ?p???se?.

The form (3) may possibly indicate the priority of the artist, but it
is more probable that it was adopted as forming an iambic trimeter.
When ?p???se? only occurs on a painted vase, it is generally to be
assumed that the potter is also the painter.

The older artists avoided, as a rule, the imperfect ???afe or ?p??e?,
but its use came into fashion for a short time among the early R.F.
artists, such as Andokides, Chelis, and Psiax, who use ?p??e? (Vol. I.
p. 430); it was again adopted by the Paestum and Apulian schools, as a
modest affectation that their work was as yet unfinished.[2147] But the
majority preferred the more decided aorist, indicating completeness.
The word µe or ?µ? is usually added by the earlier artists, as in the
instance already quoted from Exekias. Generally speaking, ???a?e?
rarely occurs on B.F. vases, ?p???se? being the rule. A rare form of
inscription is the formula ????? (t?? de??a), as in the doubtful
signature of Statios[2148]; and even more unique is the use of the word
?e?aµe?e?? by the early Attic potter Oikopheles,[2149] as a synonym for
p??e??. Other peculiarities of signature are to be seen on the works of
Lykinos (????sat?), Paseas (?as??? t?? ??aµµ?t??), and Therinos
(Te????? p???µa).[2150]

The potter sometimes added the name of his father, either as being that
of a well-known man, or to distinguish himself from others of the same
name. Thus Timonidas of Corinth signs [????????S ?G?????] ??µ???da?
???a?e ??a (_sc._ son of Bias); Tleson, ???s?? ? ?e?????; Eucheiros,
????t?µ?? ???? (the son of Ergotimos); Euthymides, [???????], ? ??????.
The latter in one instance not only gives his patronymic, but
challenges comparison with his great rival Euphronios, in the following
terms: [?S ???? ??? ??F?????S], ?? ??d?p?t(e) ??f??????, _i.e._,
“Euphronios never made anything like this.”[2151] Other peculiarities
are: the omission of the verb, as was sometimes done by R.F. artists
(_e.g._ Psiax); or, on the contrary, the simple ?p???se?, without a
name, sometimes found on R.F. kylikes of the Epictetan school[2152]; or
the addition by the artist of his tribe or nationality. Among the
latter we have Kleomenes, Teisias, and Xenophantos, who style
themselves ????a???, and Nikias, who not only gives his father’s name,
but also his deme in Attica:

[Illustration: FIG. 176.]

               ????a? ?[?]µ??????? ??af??st??? ?p???se?.

Two other artists call themselves ? ??d?? (the Lydian) and ? S?????
(the Scythian). Smikros signs one of his vases in the Louvre[2153]
?????S????O?????, “It seems to be Smikros’ work.” There are also
frequent vagaries of spelling, as in F?t?a? for F??t?a?, ???fa??? or
????a??? for ??µfa???, and ??p?? for ?????. Sakonides once spells his
name ?a????d??, and Nikosthenes once uses the koppa ? for ?. Fuller
information in regard to this subject may be found in Klein’s admirable
work; there is also much of interest relating to the R.F. cup-painters
in Hartwig’s exhaustive treatise. A complete list of all known artists’
names is given at the end of this chapter.

                  *       *       *       *       *

We now come to the inscriptions which have relation to the subjects
depicted on the vases. These are seldom of a general kind, having
reference to the whole composition; but on a Panathenaic amphora in
Naples a boxing scene is entitled [??????????], “general maul,”[2154]
and on another in Munich over a foot-race is written, [S????? ??????
????], stad??? ??d??? ????,[2155] while B.F. lekythos in the same
collection with Dionysos and dancing Maenads is inscribed
[?????S??(?)?].[2156] On a vase with a Homeric subject is [?????????],
and on one with a scene from Theban legend [?????????].[2157]
Localities are sometimes hinted at by the use of such words as [?????]
(?????) on the François vase, where Polyxena goes to the fountain, or
by the [???????????] ?a?????(?)? ????? on the British Museum hydria (B
331) with girls drawing water at the fountain of Kallirrhoë. More often
names are given to inanimate objects like the ????? (seat) and ?d??a
(pitcher) on the François vase, sta?µ?? on the Arkesilas cup, the ß?µ??
(altar) on a vase in Munich (_Cat._ 124), ???a (lyre) on a cup in
Munich (333), and ?????? (throne) on an amphora in the Louvre.[2158] On
a washing-basin on a R.F. vase published by Tischbein appears the word
[????S??], _i.e._ “public baths.”[2159] The word t??µ?? sometimes
appears on a _stele_ on later vases.[2160] Animals are also
occasionally named, such as the ?? on the Munich vase already quoted
(333).[2161]

But the greater majority of these inscriptions refer to the names of
persons, deities, and mythological figures, the name being usually in
the nominative, but occasionally in the genitive, with e?d?? or e????
understood.[2162] Sometimes generic names or nicknames are given to
ordinary figures in _genre_ scenes, as ???e?a?t??, “the ship’s
captain”; ??µa????, “leader of the revels”; or, again, ?????pp?? for a
horseman, ???aµ?? and ??µµ????? for a Scythian bowman.[2163] Names of
real contemporary persons are occasionally introduced, as on a hydria
by Phintias, on which his comrade Euthymides and the “minor artist”
Tlenpolemos are represented, with names inscribed[2164]; and on a
stamnos by Smikros at Brussels the artist introduces himself and the
potter Pheidiades at a banquet.[2165] Although proper names usually
stand alone, they are sometimes accompanied by some interjection, as
?d? ?e?es?e??, “Here is Menestheus,”[2166] Sf??? ?de ?a??e, “This is
the Sphinx; hail!”[2167] or in the form of a phrase, as ??µ?? e?µ?
?????????.[2168] So also we find [?????S G??O?] ????? ?????, “the old
man of the sea,” for Nereus[2169]; [??S??? ?????S] “Nestor of
Pylos”[2170]; [???S F?S] ???? f??, for Dionysos[2171]; [???S ???S],
“the son of Zeus,” for Herakles[2172]; ta???? f??ß??, “the grazing
bull,” for the metamorphosed Zeus (a doubtful instance).[2173]

Besides the names of figures and objects, words and exclamations are
sometimes represented as proceeding from the mouths of the figures
themselves, in the same manner as on the labels affixed to the figures
of saints in the Middle Ages. They vary in length and purport, but in
some cases they appear to be extracts from poems or songs, or
expressions familiar at the time, but now unintelligible or lost in the
wreck of Hellenic literature. They are found on both B.F. and R.F.
vases, but more commonly on the former, and generally read according to
the direction of the figure, as if issuing from the mouth.

Thus a boy pouring wine out of an amphora cries, [???? ?? . . ?????],
?(?)?e? ?d[??] ?????, “Pour in sweet wine”[2174]; over the first of
three runners in a race appears ?????, ????µ????, “Polymenon, you
win”[2175]; again, Amphiaraos is exhorted to mount his chariot with the
word ???ßa,[2176] or one personage says to another, ?a??e or p??e ?a?
s?.[2177] Sometimes the words are evidently those of a song, as on a
R.F. kylix at Athens, where a man lying on a couch sings an elegy of
Theognis beginning ? pa?d?? ?????ste, “Fairest of boys!”[2178] Another
sings [????????????], which has been recognised as an inaccurate
version of an Aeolic line, ?a? p???? ?a? µ??µa?.[2179] On a red-figured
vase in the British Museum (E 270) a man accompanied by a flute-player
has an inscription proceeding from his open mouth, which runs,
[????????????????T?], ?d? p?t’ ?? ???????; evidently the beginning of a
song, “Here once in Tiryns....” On a stamnos in the British Museum (E
439) the letters ??? appear before the mouth of a Seilenos, and
evidently represent notes of music.[2180]

On a psykter by Euphronios[2181] a courtesan playing at kottabos casts
the drops out of a cup with the words [??G????SS????????????], t??
t??de ?at?ss? ??a??(e), “To thee, Leagros, I dash these drops.” Another
kylix (Munich 371) represents a surfeited drinker on a couch, saying,
?? d??aµ’ ??, “I can no more!”

To turn to another class of these expressions, we have a Panathenaic
amphora in the British Museum (B 144), on which a herald proclaims a
victor in the horse-race as follows: [????????? : ????S : ?????],
??(s)?e???t?? ?pp?? ????, “The horse of Dysneiketos[2182] wins.” On
another of the same class[2183] is an acrobat on horseback before
judges, of whom one cries, [????S???????S??????], ?a??? t?
??ß??t?[2184] t??, “Bravo, then, to the acrobat.” A boy walking with
his dog calls to it, [????????], ?e??ta?e (_i.e._ “Maltese (?)
dog”).[2185] A charioteer calls to his horses, ??a, ??a, “Gee
up!”[2186] Women weeping over a corpse cry, ??µ??, “Woe is me!”[2187]
In a representation of Oedipus and the Sphinx on a R.F. vase in Rome
the words [??????[????]], ?a? t??p???, occur, evidently with reference
to the well-known riddle.[2188]

An interesting bit of dialogue appears on a B.F. vase,[2189] which
represents boys and men watching a swallow, evidently the first of the
returning spring; one boy says, ?d?? ?e??d??, “See, the swallow”; to
which a man replies, ?? t?? ??a???a, “Yes, by Herakles!” Another boy
joins in with a?t??, “There she is,” and ?a? ?d?, “It is already
spring.” Another good instance is on a B.F. vase in the Vatican.[2190]
On one side we see the proprietor of an olive garden extracting oil
from the olives, with the prayer, [???????????T?????S??SG??] ? ?e?
p?te?, a??e p???s??? ???[??µ’ ??, “O Father Zeus, may I be rich!” while
on the other he sits over a full vessel, and cries to the purchaser,
[????????? ????? ??????????], ?d? µ??, ?d? p???(?) pa?ß?ßa?e?,
“Already, already it has gone far beyond my needs.”[2191]

To conclude with a few miscellaneous and unique inscriptions, we have
firstly, on a vase in the British Museum (E 298), a tripod, on the base
of which are the words ??aµa?t?? ????a f???, showing that it is
intended for a monument in honour of a choragic victory, with the name
of the victorious tribe. On a sepulchral stele on a B.F. funeral
amphora at Athens[2192] are the words (now nearly obliterated) ??d???
?p[?f??µ]????? ???[??] ?a[?]?? [??]??de ?e?µa[?, “Here lie I, a vile
rag of a dead man.” Similarly, on a sepulchral plaque at Athens are the
words, [SÊMATODESTIN : AREIOU], “This is the grave of Areios.”[2193] In
a representation of Sappho reading from her poems, she holds an open
roll, on which are visible the words Te??, ?e???? ?p??? ????µa? ???[??]
... ?pea pte??e?ta[2194]; and in the well-known school-scene on the
Duris vase in Berlin[2195] a teacher holds a roll, on which are the
words (in Aeolic dialect, and combined from the openings of two
distinct hymns):

           [???S????]               ???s? µ??
           [?F?S?????????]          ?(µ)f? S??µa?d???
           [???O????????]           ???(?)?? ????µa?
           [???????]                ?e?<?>de??.[2196]

A small fragment of a red-figure kylix (?) of fine style, found at
Naukratis in 1899 (and now in the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford),[2197]
has a similar scene of a dictation lesson. A seated figure unrolls an
inscribed scroll, on which is the _boustrophedon_ legend, st?s??????
?µ??? ????sa?, while another figure, of which the right hand alone
remains, is writing on a tablet (Fig. 177).

[Illustration: FIG. 177. FIGURE WITH INSCRIBED SCROLL.]

In a very puzzling scene on a R.F. vase of fine style, generally
supposed to have some reference to the Argonautic expedition, one
figure holds up an object inscribed with the name [S?S?F?S].[2198] This
object has generally been interpreted as a _tessera hospitalis_, or
“letter of introduction,” as we should say.

Lastly, there is the class of Panathenaic vases with their
inscriptions.[2199] They fall into two groups: (1) the words [???
?T???T?? ?T???], to which [???] is sometimes added, “(I am) from the
games at Athens”; (2) the names of archons, which only occur on the
fourth-century examples. They form a unique instance of inscriptions
which give direct information as to the date of a vase, and range from
367 to 313 B.C. (see Vol. I. p. 390).

Sometimes vases (especially in the B.F. period) are covered with
meaningless collocations of letters, either separate or in the form of
words. Some ingenious explanations of these have been propounded, but
none are very satisfactory. They are often found on the class known as
“Corintho-Attic” or “Tyrrhenian amphorae,” and it is just possible that
in this case they are attempts by an Athenian workman to copy the
unfamiliar Corinthian alphabet.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The third class of inscriptions on Attic vases is composed of those
which have no direct relation to the vase itself. They include
invocations to deities such as were used in making libations, _e.g._
???? S?t????, “To Zeus the Saviour”[2200]; or, again, the exhortations
so frequently found on B.F. kylikes of the “Minor Artists’” school, of
which the commonest is ?a??e ?a? p?e? e?, “Hail, and drink deep!”[2201]
or ?a??e ?a? p?e? t??de, “Hail, and drink this!”[2202] On a number of
R.F. kylikes appears the word p??sa???e??, “I salute you.”[2203]

But the most numerous and important inscriptions of this class are
those conveniently named by German archaeologists “Lieblingsnamen,” or
“Lieblingsinschriften,” for which we have no satisfactory equivalent in
English, though “pet-name” and “love-name” have been suggested, and
latterly “?a???-name.” The latter title has been adopted from the fact
that the usual form which these inscriptions take is that of a proper
name in the nominative case, generally masculine, with the word ?a???
attached. Sometimes, but not so frequently, the name is feminine, with
?a??[2204]; the superlative form ?????st?? is also found.[2205] In
other cases ? or ? pa?? appears in place of the proper name, or the
word d??e? is added, and sometimes also ?a? or ?a???, emphasising the
statement. The most remarkable instance is a B.F. jug at Munich, round
the shoulder of which is the inscription ?a??? ?????a ?????e?? ?a???
??µ?? d??e?, ?a?? ??te??? pa?? ?a???, ??µ??? ??µ?? ?a??? f????.[2206]
It is not quite certain how far the word ?a??? should be interpreted in
a physical sense as “handsome” or “fair,” or in an ethical sense as
“good” or “noble”; but having regard to the manners and customs of
fifth-century Athens,[2207] it is more likely that the physical meaning
of the word is to be inferred.

These inscriptions are often found on B.F. vases, but far more
frequently in the succeeding period, and generally in more or less
direct connection with artists’ signatures, from which fact interesting
results have been obtained. Special attention has been drawn to them of
late years, from the fact that many of the names are those borne by
historical personages, such as Miltiades, Megakles, Glaukon, and so on,
and attempts have been made to connect them with those characters (see
Vol. I. p. 403).

Klein, the chief writer on this subject, has collected in the second
edition of his valuable work no less than 558 instances of these
?a???-inscriptions,[2208] as against 424 signatures of artists; and
there are besides these the numerous instances in which no proper name
is given.

The chief question which calls for consideration in regard to these
inscriptions is their purport, and the reason why they occur
exclusively on vases, and of these exclusively on Attic vases covering
a period of not more than one hundred years. The custom was not, of
course, an unfamiliar one at Athens, as two references in Aristophanes
indicate. In the _Acharnians_[2209] he describes the Thracian Sitalkes
as being such a “lover” of the Athenians that he wrote on the walls,
“The Athenians are fair”; and, again, the slave Xanthias, in the
_Wasps_, speaking of his master’s litigious proclivities, says that if
ever he saw ??µ?? ?a??? written on a door he promptly wrote by the side
??µ?? ?a???.[2210] But the most interesting and apposite instance
recorded is that of Pheidias, who scratched on the finger of his statue
of the Olympian Zeus, ?a?t????? ?a???.[2211] Generally speaking, the
word was no doubt intended to refer to the personal beauty of boys (as
indicated by the use of ? pa??), or at any rate of young athletes, and
was applied to popular favourites of the day,[2212] whose occupations
in the gymnasium, at the banquet, and elsewhere were matters of
every-day talk.

These names may have been placed on the vases with the view of
attracting the public to purchase them, or may even have been the
subject of special orders from customers. Some light seems to be thrown
on the matter by a cup signed by the painter Phintias,[2213] which
represents a young man, purse in hand, making purchases of vases in a
potter’s workshop. This vase has the inscription ?a???a? ?a???, but
whether it is intended as a representation of Chairias or his admirer
it is impossible to say. The names, however, are not always those of
every-day life. They may have relation to the figures on the vase, as
[?????? ????S].[2214]

We have already noted that historical names frequently occur in this
series, and it is obvious that if they can be identified with the
actual historical owners of such names much valuable information in
regard to the chronology of Greek vases will be gained. The question
has already been discussed in a previous chapter (Vol. I. p. 403), and
the principles there laid down need not be repeated. It is sufficient
to say that so far only two or three names have been identified with
those of historical personages, though more results may yet be
obtained. Of these one is Stesileos, occurring on two vases in Berlin,
and identified with a _strategos_ who fell at Marathon in 490.[2215] On
two lekythi (one late B.F., the other R.F.) the name of Glaukon son of
Leagros[2216] appears, and these two names have also been identified
with Athenian _strategi_, Leagros having fallen in battle against the
Edones in 467, while Glaukon commanded at Kerkyra in 433–432 B.C. It
may be roughly inferred that Leagros was a boy (pa??) about 510 B.C.,
and his son Glaukon about 470 B.C., which gives an approximate date
(within ten years or so) for these two groups of vases. It is, however,
obvious that much at present only rests on hypothesis.

It is curious to note that nearly all these names have an aristocratic
sound: thus we have Alcibiades, Alkmaeon, Hipparchos, and Megakles,
besides those already quoted. Miltiades ?a??? occurs on a R.F. plate at
Oxford,[2217] but there seems hardly sufficient evidence for referring
it to the youth of the conqueror of Marathon (cf. Vol. I. p. 403). The
table at the end of this chapter may be found useful as giving a
_conspectus_ of the principal names and their relation to the artists.

                  *       *       *       *       *

It is now necessary to discuss some of the principal peculiarities of
the Attic vase-inscriptions, in regard to palaeography, orthography,
and grammar.[2218] The variety in the forms and uses of the letters is
somewhat surprising at first sight, but it must be remembered that
non-Attic influences were always strong, as has indeed already been
pointed out.

? usually appears either in that form or as [Corinthian ?], [Sicyonian
?]; but such variations as 15[14]RF Attic alpha 15[14]RF Attic alpha
15[13]RF Attic alpha are found on R.F. vases, while at a later period
even 15[13]RF Attic alpha occurs. ? on the vases of Duris generally
appears as 15[13]RF Attic alpha [Attic lambda2] is found for [Attic
lambda], the Attic form of ?. S varies between [sigma] and [fourline
sigma], while such abnormal forms as 15[11]rounded S (Oikopheles), and
15[11]E-shaped sigma are not unknown. The minor artist Xenokles uses a
sort of cursive handwriting for his signature. ? is used for ? and ?,
as in [H???S] for [?????S], [??????S] for [????K??S], which seems to be
a confusion of ideas resulting from its use for _eta_ in Ionic, and for
_h_ in Chalcidian (_i.e._ Western) alphabets.[2219] The sign for the
aspirate occurs first as [heta], afterwards as ?, and is sometimes
introduced without apparent reason, as in [?????T??] for ???e????a, and
[H?F??????] for ?f??d?t?. The digamma is unknown on Attic vases, but
the François vase and the allied 'Tyrrhenian' group give some
interesting examples of the use of ? for ?. Thus we find [?ORA?S] for
???a?, [???????S] for ?t??????, [?ARI??O] for ?ap????. On the
Corintho-Attic vase in Berlin (1704) are two curious instances of
dittography, due no doubt to Corinthian influence, ????????? being
written [??Y?NIOS] (???e?????) and ?e?? as [???YS], where the
Corinthian and Attic forms of ? and ? stand side by side. So on a vase
in the Louvre (E 852) we have [?DEYS] = ?de??.[2220]

As a result no doubt of the unsettled state of the alphabet in the
fifth century, a confusion in the use of e and ?, and ? and ?
respectively, often arises, and we find ????µ???? ????? for ????µa???
?a???, [?????O??] for ??µ?d???, [T???S] for T?t??, and similar
forms.[2221] The diphthong e? is sometimes rendered by ??, sometimes by
?, as in [????????S] for ?a?? d??e??; a? and e? are also rendered by ?,
as in the name [???????] for ???µa??? and [???T?S????] for ?e??es??e?a,
or a? by ?, as in [?T????] for ????a?a. In a few words, such as [?????]
(?e????) and [S?????S] (Se??????), the diphthong e? is represented by
its other member ?. On the other hand, we find [??????S] for ??????
(B.M. B 301). The general vagueness of the Attic craftsmen’s
orthography is well illustrated by Kretschmer in the word ?d?sse??,
which is not only invariably spelled with a ?, reminding us of the
Latin form _Ulixes_, but occurs in the following different
forms[2222]:— 15[86]??????S 15[79]?????? 15[99]???????S 15[103]???????S
15[73]?????S 15[81]???S??S 15[91]O??SS??S this order being roughly
chronological. The ordinary d-form is, however, found.[2223]

A tendency to assimilation of aspirated consonants, always avoided in
literary Greek, is seen in such forms as [T??T????S] for ?a???ß???,
[?????????] for ?a???????, and [F??F???S] for ??µfa???. The reverse
tendency is curiously illustrated in [????T???S] for ?a??ta???.
Unassimilated forms occur, as in the case of [??????S] for
????pp??.[2224] Another peculiarity is the omission of nasals before
consonants, as in [???????] for ?ta??(?)t?, [???????S] for
??(?)da????,[2225] [??F??] for ??(µ)fa?, [?????] for ??(µ)p??, and
[???????S] for ?(?)???ad??. There is also a tendency to avoid double
consonants, as in [??S???] for ???s???a, [??????] for ????d??,
[????????S???] for ???ta?µ??st?a, [????F???] for ?e?s?fatta[2226]; this
is especially common in the case of double ? or double S, as in
[??????S] and [??S???] just quoted. On the other hand, on later vases
consonants are often doubled without reason, as in [??SS???] for
??st??,[2227] [???????????S] for ???pt??eµ??, [???????] for ??µ???,
this being commonest with [fourline S] and [?]. [?] and [Chalcidian ?],
originally absent from the Attic alphabet, are represented usually by
[?S] and [TS], exceptionally by [?S] and [?S], as in [?????S],
[?S??????S][2228]; also occasionally by metathesis, as [????SF??],
[S???T?S], [??S??S????S].[2229] Attic contractions, such as [??????S]
for ?a? ?te??? and [?????] for ?a??µ??, are also found.[2230]

Among peculiarities of inflection (some of which may of course be mere
misspellings) may be mentioned [????S] = ???? for ????, [???S] for
pa?s, [T?S?S] for T?se??, and [???S?S] for ?e?se??; also the open form
-ee? for -h?, as in [????????S], [?S???????S], and the form p?e? for
p?e; to some of these allusion has already been made.

                  *       *       *       *       *

From this mass of detail it is possible to deduce certain chronological
results,[2231] which are not without their value for the dating of the
various Athenian fabrics. Excluding the doubtful Dipylon vase, the
inscriptions extend from the seventh century[2232] down to the time of
Xenophantos and the late Panathenaic amphorae, a period of over three
hundred years.

In the François vase we meet with the closed [asper] for the aspirate,
the ? and ? together, and the two forms [T] and [T] of T; as the [T]
form dropped out of private use earlier than out of official documents,
and is found in the latter down to 520 B.C., we can date the François
vase about the middle of the sixth century (not later, as the closed
[asper] shows); the same date will also apply to the earliest
Panathenaic amphora (B.M. B 130), and the cup of Oikopheles. The fact
that Eucheiros, a “minor artist,” calls himself the son of Ergotimos,
who made the François vase, permits us to place him some thirty years
later, about 520 B.C., and this point may be regarded as the zenith of
the B.F. period. In the later B.F. vases the H and O for ? and ? begin
to make their appearance[2233]; but the conservative Panathenaic
amphorae, like the coins, adhere to the original spelling right down to
the end.

The existence of the R.F. style for some time previous to 480 B.C. has
now been established by the discoveries on the Athenian Acropolis. This
is also borne out by the appearance on vases by Euthymides of the [T]
form for [T], and the complete absence in the earlier vases of the H
and O forms, which are not found among the Acropolis fragments. The
hydria of Meidias (B.M. B 224), which marks the zenith of the “fine”
period, has a purely Ionic alphabet. The Ionic forms seem to have come
in with the “fine” R.F. style after 480 B.C., and for some time we find
a mixed alphabet on the vases.[2234] It is also interesting to note the
appearance in some cases of the Thasian alphabet, with its use of O for
? (as in ????µ???? ?a???, B.M. E 318), which has been traced to the
influence of Polygnotos.[2235]

                  *       *       *       *       *

We conclude our account of inscriptions on Greek vases with a brief
survey of those found on the vases of Southern Italy[2236]; it will be
seen that they are neither numerous nor specially interesting.

The inscriptions are for the most part in the Doric dialect and Ionic
alphabet, with the addition of the Doric sign [doric asper] for the
aspirate. Generally speaking, these Doric forms are found on the
Apulian vases, whereas on the products of Paestum they are mainly
Ionic, with admixtures of Doric. Attic forms also occur. It seems
probable that the Doric tendencies of the Apulian inscriptions are due
to the influence of the great Laconian colony of Tarentum (although the
vases were not made there), while Paestum was influenced, on the other
hand, by the neighbouring Ionic colonies, such as Cumae.

The latter, being for the most part of earlier date, will first occupy
our attention. They include two artists’ signatures, which appear in
the form [?SS???S] [?G??F?] and [??TO?] [?G??F?]. We have already
remarked on the use of the imperfect tense (p. 258); there are five
vases by Assteas and one by Python, on all of which the figures also
have their names inscribed.[2237] The Ionic forms appear in [??G???],
?e????, [???????], ???µ???, and so on; on the other hand, Python uses
the Doric form [?OS], ??? = ???, and Assteas the Doric [Doric heta] in
[?SS?????S] = ?<s>spe????. Ionic forms are also found on a few Apulian
vases, as for instance Berlin 3257 (from Ceglie), which has [?]?T????]
and [???????] for ????µ?a and ????µ?a, or Naples 2296 with [??S???] for
??sa?a.

Some of the inscribed Apulian vases are not without interest, as for
instance that in the Louvre, which bears the signature of Lasimos:
[??S???S ?G????], ??s?µ?? ???a?e.[2238] He was probably not a Greek,
but of Messapian origin. On the great Dareios vase in Naples (No. 3253)
several names are inscribed, such as [????S] for???a?, [?S??],
[??????S], and the general title of the scene, [???S??]. On a
well-known burlesque scene in the British Museum (F 269) the characters
are inscribed [????] (??a), [???????S] (?a?da??? = Hephaistos), and
[????????S] (??<e>?????? = Ares); and on the fine amphora F 331,
representing Pelops at Olympia, are numerous incised inscriptions:
[?????], ?????; [???????S], ????µa??; [??????????], ?pp?d?µe?a, etc. On
the altar is painted [???S], ????, _sc._ “the altar of Zeus.”

A curious inscription is that on a krater in Naples (No. 2872), which
represents Eros and a woman playing at ball; the latter leans on a
stele on which is inscribed [??S????????SF????] which was interpreted
by Cavedoni, probably correctly, as ??? ?? µ?? t?? sf(a)??a?, “You
might send me the ball.” The [Sicyonian ?] is an error for [Doric
heta], the [heta reversed] for ?. This inscription, be it noted, is
painted, contrary to the general rule in these vases, as they are
generally incised; but an exception seems to be made in favour of
inscriptions on _stelae_ and similar objects, which are not uncommon,
though many are open to suspicion. In the British Museum there are
several examples,[2239] but by far the most curious is on an amphora in
Naples (No. 2868), where a _stele_ is inscribed:

[Illustration:

  ??t? [µ??] µ?????? te ?a? ?sf?d???? p????????
  ???p? d’ ??d?p?da? ?a??(?) ???? ???

  “On my back I bear mallow and many-rooted asphodel, but
  in my bosom Oedipus, Laios’ son.”[2240]
]

A curious and unique inscription is found engraved on a kotyle from
Chiusi: ??t?? t?? d?µ?? ?fa p??a???, “This fellow said that the people
were a depraved lot.”[2241] The ? of p?????? was first written ?, and
then corrected into ?, the Doric form. It may be supposed that the
inscription is due to a workman who did not approve of the democracy
under which he lived.

On an amphora from Gnatia (Fasano), with a goose and a cock, in white
on the black ground, is the quaint dialogue:

                      [?????????, ??????????G???]
         a? t?? ???a, ? t?? ??et?????a, or, “What, the goose?”
                         “Oh, the cock!”[2242]

Etruscan inscriptions do not come within the scope of this chapter, but
an Oscan inscription should be mentioned here, which is incised on a
vase in the British Museum (F 233), over an actor: [?????S] = _Santia_,
the Oscan form of ?a???a?, which was a common name for the slave of
comedy.

            LIST OF ARTISTS’ SIGNATURES FOUND ON GREEK VASES

                    I. EARLY FABRICS (CHAPTER VII.)

 Aristonoös   ?p???se       Uncertain fabric     See Vol. I. p. 297

 Pyrrhos      ?p???se       Proto-Corinthian     _Rev. Arch._ xl. (1902),
                                                 p. 41

 Chares       ???a?e        Corinthian           Klein, _Meistersig._ p.
                                                 29

 Milonidas    ???a?e           do.               _Wiener Vorl._ 1888, pl.
                                                 1, fig. 4

 Timonidas    ???a?e        do.                  Klein,  p. 28

 Gamedes      ?p???se       Boeotian             _Ibid._ p. 31

 Gryton       ?p???se       do.                  _Boston Mus. Report_,
                                                 1898, p. 54

 Iphitadas    ?p???se       Boeotian             _Röm. Mitth._ 1897, p.
                                                 105

 Menaidas     ?p???se       do.                  _Wiener Vorl._ 1889, pl.
                                                 1, fig. 1

 Mnasalkes    ?p???se       do.                  _Boston Mus. Report_,
                                                 1899, p. 56

 Theozotos    ?p???se       do.                  Louvre F 69


            II. ATTIC BLACK-FIGURED VASES (Vol. I. p. 379).

 Amasis       ?p???se       Amphorae and         Klein, p. 43; Vol. I. p.
                            oinochoae            383

 Anakles      ?p???se[2243] Minor artist         _Ibid._ p. 75

 Antidoros    ?p??e?        Minor artist         _Notizie degli Scavi_,
                                                 1897, p. 231

 Archikles    ?p???se       Minor artist         Klein, p. 76

 Charitaios   ?p???se       Hydria and kylix     _Ibid._ p. 51

 Cheiron      ?p???se       Minor artist         _Ibid._ p. 79

 Epitimos     ?p???se       Minor artist         _Ibid._ p. 84

 Ergoteles    ?p???se       Minor artist         Berlin 1758

 Ergotimos    ?p???se       Potter of François   Klein, p. 37
                            vase; kylix

 Eucheiros    ?p???se       Minor artist         _Ibid._ p. 72

 Euphiletos   ???a?e        Pinax                _Ibid._ p. 49

 Exekias      {???a?e }     Amphorae and kylikes _Ibid._ p. 38

              {?p???se}

 Glaukytes    ?p???se       Minor artist (with   _Ibid._ p. 77
                            Archikles)

 Hermogenes   ?p???se       Minor artist         _Ibid._ p. 82

 Kaulos       ?p???se       Potter for Sakonides _Notizie degli Scavi_,
                                                 1903, p. 35

 Kittos       ?p???se       Panathen. amph. (4th B.M. B 604
                            cent.)

 Kleisophos   ???a?e        Oinochoë (Xenokles   Athens 691
                            as potter)

 Klitias      ???a?e        François vase        Klein, p. 32; B.M. B
                            (painter)            601_{4–5}

 Kolchos      ?p???se       Oinochoë             Berlin 1732

 Mnesikleides ???a?e        Aryballos            Athens 669

 Myspios      ?p???se       Minor artist         Klein, p. 84

 Neandros     ?p???se       Minor artist         _Ibid._ p. 79

 Nearchos     ???. ?. ?p.   Situla               _Ibid._ p. 38

 Nikosthenes  ?p???se       About eighty vases   _Ibid._ p. 51

 Oikopheles   ??e??µe?se    Kylix                Oxford 189

 Paseas       ???µµa        Pinax                Klein, p. 49

 Phrynos      ?p???se       Minor artist         B.M. B 424 and Boston

 Priapos      ?p???se       Doubtful             B.M. B 395

 Psoieas      ?p???se(?)    Minor artist         B.M. B 600_{40}

 Sakonides    ???a?e        Minor artist         Klein, p. 85

 Sikelos      ???a?e        Panathen. amphora    _Ibid._ p. 86

 Skythes      ???a?e        Pinax                _Ibid._ p. 48

 Sokles       ?p???se       Minor artist         _Ibid._ p. 79

 Sondros      ?p???se       Minor artist         B.M. B 601_{6}

 Sophilos     ???a?e        Fragment             _Ath. Mitth._ 1889, pl. 1

 Taleides     ?p???se       Various shapes       Klein, p. 46

 Thrax        ?p???se       Minor artist         _Notizie degli Scavi_,
                                                 1903, p. 36

 Timagoras    ?p???se       Hydriae              Klein, p. 50

 Tlenpolemos  ?p???se       Minor artist; potter _Ibid._ p. 84
                            for Sakonides

 Tleson       ?p???se       Minor artist         _Ibid._ p. 73

 Tychios      ?p???se       Hydria               _Ibid._ p. 50

 Xenokles     ?p???se       Minor artist; potter _Ibid._ p. 80
                            for Kleisophos


                 III. TRANSITIONAL OR “MIXED TECHNIQUE”

 Andokides    { ?p???se }   Amphorae, etc.       See Vol. I. p. 386

              { ?p??e?  }

 Chelis                     See below

 Epiktetos                  See below

 Epilykos                   See below

 Hischylos    ?p???se       Potter for           Klein, p. 97
                            Epiktetos,
                            Sakonides,
                            Pheidippos

 Nikosthenes                See above; two
                            mixed; three
                            R.F.[2244]

 Pamphaios    ?p???se       Various shapes       _Ibid._ p. 87

 Pasiades     ?p???se       White-ground         B.M. B 668

 Thypheithide ?p???se       Doubtful             See B.M. E 4
 s


          IV. ATTIC RED-FIGURED VASES (see Vol. I. p. 420 ff.)

 Aeson        ???a?e        Kylix                _Ant. Denkm._ ii. pl. 1

 Amasis II    (???a?e)      Kylix                Bibl. Nat. 535; Hartwig,
                                                 _Meistersch._ chap. xvi.

 Apollodoros  ???a?e        Kylikes              _Ibid._ chap. xxii.

 Aristophanes ???a?e        Kylikes              Berlin 2531; _Boston Mus.
                                                 Report_, 1900, p. 49 ff.

 Brygos       ?p???se       Kylikes              Hartwig, chap. xiii.

 Chachrylion  ?p???se       Kylikes              _Ibid._ chap iv.

 Chelis       { ?p???se}    Kylikes (one         Klein, _Meistersig._ p.
                            “mixed”)             116

              { ?p??e?   }

 Deiniades    ?p???se       Potter for Phintias

 Duris        ???a?e        Various shapes       Hartwig, chaps. x., xxi.

 Epigenes     ?p???se       Kantharos            Klein, p. 186

 Epiktetos    ???a?e        Kylikes and plates   _Ibid._ p. 100

 Epilykos     ???a?e        Kylikes              _Ibid._ p. 114: see
                                                 _Monuments Piot_, ix. p.
                                                 135 ff.

 Erginos      ?p???se       Potter for
                            Aristophanes

 Euergides    ?p???se       Kylikes              Klein, p. 99

 Euphronios   { ???a?e }    Various shapes       Hartwig, chaps. vii.,
                                                 xviii.

              {?p???se }

 Euthymides   ???a?e        Various shapes       Hoppin, _Euthymides_

 Euxitheos    ?p???se       Amphora; potter for  Klein, p. 135
                            Oltos

 Hegesiboulos ?p???se       White-ground cup     _Branteghem Cat._, No.
                                                 167

 Hegias       ???a?e        Kylix                Klein, p. 186

 Hermaios     ?p???se       Kylikes              See Vol. I. p. 424

 Hermonax     ???a?e        Stamni and “pelikae” Klein, p. 200

 Hieron       ?p???se       Kylikes and kotylae; Hartwig, chap. xii.
                            potter for Makron

 Hilinos      ?p???se       Potter for Psiax

 Hischylos    ?p???se       See above

 Hypsis       ???a?e        Hydria               Klein, p. 198

 Kalliades    ?p???se       Potter for Duris:
                            see Table V.

 Kleophrades  ?p???se       Potter for Duris and
                            Amasis II.

 Makron       ???a?e        (With Hieron)

 Maurion      ?p??e?        Pyxis                B.M. E 770; _Class. Rev._
                                                 1894, p. 419

 Megakles     ?p???se       Pyxis                Klein, p. 205

 Meidias      ?p???se       Hydria               B.M. E 224 = Plate XLI.

 Mys          ?p???se       Lekythos             Athens 1362

 Nikias       ?p???se       Krater in B.M        See p. 259 above

 Oltos        ???a?e        Kylikes              Hartwig, chap. v.

 Onesimos     ???a?e        Kylikes (Euphronios  _Ibid._ chap. xix.
                            as potter)

 Peithinos    ???a?e        Kylikes              _Ibid._ chap. xi.

 Pheidippos   ???a?e        Kylix                B.M. E 6

 Phintias     ???a?e        Various shapes       Hartwig, chap. ix.

 Pistoxenos   ?p???se       Kotylae; potter for  _Ibid._ chap. xiv.
                            Euphronios

 Polygnotos   ???a?e        Amphorae; stamni     _Mon. Antichi_, ix. p. 1
                                                 ff.

 Praxias      ???a?e        (Non-Athenian?)      Klein, p. 31

 Psiax        ???a?e        Kylix and alabastron _Amer. Journ. of Arch._
                                                 1895, p. 485

 Python I.    ?p???se       Potter for Epiktetos
                            and Duris

 Sikanos      ?p???se       Plate                Klein, p. 116

 Smikros      ???a?e[2245]  Stamni               _Monuments Piot_, ix. p.
                                                 15 ff.

 Sosias       ?p???se       Kylix                Berlin 2278; Klein, p.
                                                 147

 Sotades      { ?p???se }   White-ground vases   { _Branteghem Cat._
                                                 159–166

              { ?p??e?  }                        { Klein, p. 187

 Syriskos     ?p???se       Astragalos vase      Hartwig, chap. xxiv.

 Xenophantos  ?p???se       Lekythos             Petersburg 1790

 Xenotimos    ?p???se       Kylikes              _Branteghem Cat._ 84–85


                    V. UNFIGURED AND MODELLED VASES

 Charinos     ?p???se       Modelled vases       Klein, p. 215; _Röm.
                                                 Mitth._ 1890, p. 316

 Kalliades    ?p???se       Modelled vases;      Klein, p. 216
                            potter for Duris

 Kleomenes    ?p???se       Modelled vase in     _Mon. Grecs_, 1897, pls.
                            Louvre               16–17

 Kriton       ?p???se       Jug; no subject      Klein, p. 213

 Lydos        ?p???se       Fragment; painter’s  _Ibid._ p. 217
                            name lost

 Lykinos      ????sat?      Pyxis                _Ibid._ p. 213

 Lysias       ?p???se       Jug; no subject      _Ibid._ p. 213

 Myson        ???. ?. ?p.   Fragment             _Ibid._ p. 217

 Prokles      ?p???se       Modelled lekythos    Berlin 2202

 Teisias      ?p???se       Vases without        Klein, p. 212
                            subject

 Therinos     p???µa        Chytra               _Ibid._ p. 214


                 VI. SOUTH ITALIAN (see Vol. I. p. 478)

 Assteas      ???a?e        Kraters, etc.        See Vol. I. p. 478

 Lasimos      ???a?e        Krater               Klein, p. 210

 Python       ???afe        Krater               B.M. F 149

 Statios      ?????         Doubtful             See B.M. F 594

                   LIST OF ????S-NAMES ON GREEK VASES

 _Names in parentheses denote the artists with whom they are associated_

                         I. BLACK-FIGURED VASES

     Aischis                        Myia

     Andokides (Timagoras)          Mys

     Anthylle                       Neokleides (Taleides)

     Automenes                      Onetor

     Chairaia? (Nikosthenes)        Onetorides (Exekias)

     Chares                         Pyles

     Dorotheos (Charinos? also      Pythokles I.
     R.F.)

     Eresilla                       Rhodon

     Euphiletos                     Rhodopis

     Hippokrates (also R.F.)        Sibon (Kabeirion vase: see
                                    Vol. I. p. 218)

     Hippokritos (Glaukytes)        Sime

     Hippon I.                      Sostratos

     Kallias I. (Taleides)          Stesias (Exekias)

     Kallippe                       Stesileos

     Klitarchos (Taleides)          Stroibos

     Leagros (Exekias; also R.F.)   Timotheos

     Lysippides                     Xenodoke (Charinos)

     Mnesilla


                         II. RED-FIGURED VASES

     Aisimides                      Antimachos

     Akestor                        Antiphon

     Akestorides                    Aphrodisia

     Alexomenos                     Archinos II.

     Alkides                        Aristagoras (Duris)

     Alkimachos                     Aristarchos

     Antias                         Aristeides


     Athenodotos (Peithinos; with   Lichas
     Leagros)

     Brachas                        Lyandros

     Chairestratos                  Lykopis

     Chairias (Phintias)            Lykos (Euphronios, Duris,
                                    Onesimos)

     Chairippos                     Lysis (Hartwig, chap. xxiii.)

     Charmides                      Megakles I. (Phintias,
                                    Euthymides)

     Damas                          Megakles II.

     Diogenes (see Hartwig, chap.   Memnon (Chelis, Chachrylion)
     xv.)

     Diokles                        Midas

     Dion                           Mikion II.

     Dionokles                      Miltiades

     Diphilos                       Naukleia (Hieron)

     Dorotheos (also B.F.)          Nikodemos

     Dromippos                      Nikon

     Elpinikos                      Nikophile

     Epidromos (Chachrylion?)       Nikostratos II. (Hartwig,
                                    chap. xx.)

     Epileios                       Oinanthe

     Epimedes                       Olympiodoros (also one B.F.)

     Erosantheo                     Panaitios (Euphronios, Duris)

     Erothemis (Euphronios and      Pedieus
     Onesimos)

     Euaion                         Perses

     Eurymachos                     Phayllos

     Euryptolemos (Apollodoros)     Pheidiades

     Glaukon (Euphronios)           Pheidon

     Heras                          Philon

     Hermogenes (Duris)             Praxiteles

     Hiketes                        Sekline (Euphronios)

     Hipparchos (Epiktetos)         Sikinnos

     Hippodamas (Duris and Hieron)  Simiades

     Hippon II.                     Smikythos (Euthymides)

     Hygiainon                      Sokrates

     Kallias II.                    Solon

     Kallides                       Sophanes

     Kallikles                      Sostratos

     Kallisto (Hieron)              Thaleia

     Karton                         Theodoros

     Kephisios                      Thero (Oltos)

     Kephisophon                    Timarchos

     Kleinias                       Timokrates

     Kleophon (with Megakles I.)    Timoxenos or Timaxenos

     Krates                         Tleson

     Laches (see Hartwig, chap.     Xenon
     xx.)

     Leagros (Chachrylion,          Xenophon.
     Euphronios, Euxitheos)

      [The foregoing list is not exhaustive, but only gives the more
          frequently occurring names; reference should be made
          throughout to Klein’s _Lieblingsinschriften_, 1898 edition.]

-----

Footnote 2058:

  v. 17, 6.

Footnote 2059:

  xi. 466 D-E.

Footnote 2060:

  Hence the oblique cases ??e?, ??e??, etc., of classical usage.

Footnote 2061:

  _Die griechischen Vaseninschriften_, Gütersloh, 1894.

Footnote 2062:

  See Berlin 2891; _Arch. Zeit._ 1879, p. 96.

Footnote 2063:

  Cf. Berlin 2866 and the vase of Xenophantos (Reinach, i. 23).

Footnote 2064:

  B.M. A 189* = Plate XVII. fig. 6.

Footnote 2065:

  Vol. I. p. 436; Klein, _Meistersig._ p. 162 ff.

Footnote 2066:

  Vol. I. p. 478; Klein, _ibid._ p. 206 ff.

Footnote 2067:

  Klein, _Lieblingsinschr._^2 p. 118.

Footnote 2068:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1890, p. 396.

Footnote 2069:

  For the explanation of these names see Chapter IV.

Footnote 2070:

  B.M. E 497; Schöne in _Comm. Phil. in hon. Mommseni_, p. 658, Nos.
  29–32.

Footnote 2071:

  _Op. cit._ p. 651, No. 5. In this and the other examples it will be
  understood that [?] denotes 10 (d??a), [?] 5 (p??te), and so on; [?]
  being the sign for a drachma.

Footnote 2072:

  _Op. cit._ No. 17.

Footnote 2073:

  A diminutive of p???a, a large deep cup or bowl (see Vol. I. p. 186).

Footnote 2074:

  Schöne, _op. cit._ p. 650, No. 3.

Footnote 2075:

  _Ibid._ No. 7 = _Cat._ 1206.

Footnote 2076:

  _Cat._ 2188; Schöne’s No. 8. The meaning of ??d?a µe??? is uncertain.

Footnote 2077:

  _Ber. d. sächs. Gesellsch._ 1854, p. 36.

Footnote 2078:

  B.M. B 310; Munich 693. See Jahn in _Ber. d. Sächs. Gesellsch._ 1854,
  p. 37.

Footnote 2079:

  _Ran._ 1236.

Footnote 2080:

  _Pac._ 1202.

Footnote 2081:

  Schöne, _op. cit._ p. 655, No. 13.

Footnote 2082:

  F 595: see Vol. I. p. 135.

Footnote 2083:

  B.M. B 451; _J.H.S._ vi. p. 374 ff.

Footnote 2084:

  B.M. B 450 = _J.H.S._ vi. p. 372.

Footnote 2085:

  Boeckh, _C.I.G._ i. 545.

Footnote 2086:

  A 1054 = Roehl, _I.G.A._ 524, p. 151. See also Kretschmer, pp. 3–4.

Footnote 2087:

  _I.G.A._ 22: see below, p. 252.

Footnote 2088:

  _Ibid._ 2 = B.M. A 1512.

Footnote 2089:

  B.M. F 596: see Vol. I. p. 186.

Footnote 2090:

  Heydemann’s _Cat._ 1212.

Footnote 2091:

  B.M. F 605–6.

Footnote 2092:

  _Naukratis I._, pls. 32–4, p. 54 ff.; _Naukratis II._, pl. 21, p. 62
  ff.; _Brit. Sch. Annual_, 1898–99, p. 53.

Footnote 2093:

  _Ath. Mitth._ xv. p. 395 ff.

Footnote 2094:

  See Vol. I. pp. 139, 345.

Footnote 2095:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1881, p. 107; 1893, p. 225; Kretschmer, p. 110; also
  Vol. I. p. 291.

Footnote 2096:

  _Mon. Grecs_, 1897, pls. 16–7, p. 55; and see Vol. I. p. 493.

Footnote 2097:

  B.M. B 134; Urlichs, _Beiträge_, pl. 14.

Footnote 2098:

  Berlin 2314.

Footnote 2099:

  Examples in the B.M. are E 12 and E 457 (Pamphaios), E 61 (Hieron), E
  65 (Brygos), E 258 (Euxitheos); and cf. Fig. 129.

Footnote 2100:

  Perrot, _Hist. de l’Art_, iii. p. 670. They have been found at
  Larnaka, Paphos, Dali, and Amathus.

Footnote 2101:

  Roberts, _Gk. Epigraphy_, i. p. 154.

Footnote 2102:

  On the subject generally see Roberts, _Greek Epigraphy_, vol. i.
  (Cambridge Press).

Footnote 2103:

  See the table given by Kretschmer, p. 105.

Footnote 2104:

  See Hill, _Handbook of Greek and Roman Coins_, p. 208 ff.

Footnote 2105:

  B.M. B 130.

Footnote 2106:

  See for other details of coin-inscriptions Hill, _op. cit._

Footnote 2107:

  _Cat. of Bronzes_, No. 250.

Footnote 2108:

  No. 385 (Didot).

Footnote 2109:

  It should be borne in mind that Mycenaean vases have been found in
  Argolis, Cyprus, and elsewhere, with characters _incised_ on the
  handles, of contemporaneous execution, and forming parallels to the
  Cretan script and the later Cypriote syllabary.

Footnote 2110:

  _Olympia_, iv. pl. 39, p. 102.

Footnote 2111:

  Roehl, _I.G.A._ 377.

Footnote 2112:

  $1$2 1903, pls. 2–6: see Vol. I. p. 92.

Footnote 2113:

  See also Vol. I. p. 335.

Footnote 2114:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1891, p. 263; Kretschmer, p. 7.

Footnote 2115:

  Vol. I. p. 297 and Plate XVI.; for the latest interpretation of the
  name, as here adopted, see _Class. Review_, 1900, p. 264.

Footnote 2116:

  _E.g._ Ramsay in _J.H.S._ x. p. 187.

Footnote 2117:

  Studniczka, _Kyrene_, p. 11 ff.; Vol. I. p. 342.

Footnote 2118:

  Collected by Blass, _Dialektinschr._ iii. 3120 ff., and Wilisch,
  _Altkorinthische Thonindustrie_, p. 156.

Footnote 2119:

  Roberts (_Gk. Epigraphy_, i. p. 134) distinguishes three periods in
  the Corinthian alphabet from 700 to 400 B.C., but the vases seem to
  belong almost entirely to the first, down to 550 B.C.

Footnote 2120:

  Vol. I. p. 316, Fig. 90.

Footnote 2121:

  _Cat._ 1655: see Vol. I. p. 319.

Footnote 2122:

  Louvre E 600 = Reinach, i. 395.

Footnote 2123:

  B.M. A 1080 = Reinach, i. 306.

Footnote 2124:

  Athens 620 = Reinach, i. 394.

Footnote 2125:

  Roehl, _I.G.A._ 20, 5.

Footnote 2126:

  _Ibid._ 20, 63.

Footnote 2127:

  E 638 = _Mon. dell’ Inst._ 1855, pl. 20. It has been suggested that
  the name is originally a corruption of _Alexandra_ = Xandra = Ksandra
  = Kesandra (Kretschmer, p. 28).

Footnote 2128:

  The general peculiarities of the Corinthian alphabet are not touched
  on here, as examples have been given of all characteristic letters.
  See Roberts, _Gk. Epigraphy_, i. p. 134.

Footnote 2129:

  Kretschmer, p. 51; Roehl, _I.G.A._ p. 14, No. 22.

Footnote 2130:

  See Vol. I. p. 300; Klein, _Meisters._ p. 30; _Boston Mus. Report_,
  1898, p. 54, 1899, p. 56; _Röm. Mitth._ 1897, p. 105.

Footnote 2131:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1892, pl. 6, p. 101.

Footnote 2132:

  _Ath. Mitth._ 1890, p. 411.

Footnote 2133:

  See Vol. I. p. 357; Karo in _J.H.S._ xix. p. 156; _Ath. Mitth._ 1900,
  p. 93, note.

Footnote 2134:

  _Auserl. Vasenb._ 205, 3, 4: see Vol. I. p. 357.

Footnote 2135:

  See Vol. I. p. 322 and Kretschmer, p. 62.

Footnote 2136:

  _Rev. Arch._ xl. (1902), p. 41.

Footnote 2137:

  As is often the case with English seventeenth-century inscriptions.

Footnote 2138:

  _Frag. Com. Gr._ (_Script. Gr. Bibl._, xlii.), p. 248.

Footnote 2139:

  _Notizie degli Scavi_, 1903, p. 34.

Footnote 2140:

  For the language spoken by the µ?t????? cf. Kretschmer, p. 76, and
  Philostratus, _Vit. Soph._ ii. 1, 14; also Plat. Lys. 223_a_,
  ?p?ßa?ßa?????te? pa?da?????.

Footnote 2141:

  Naples 3089 = Millingen-Reinach, 33–4.

Footnote 2142:

  Bibl. Nat. 372 = Reinach, i. 92.

Footnote 2143:

  Bibl. Nat. 846 = Klein, _Lieblingsinschr._^2 p. 129.

Footnote 2144:

  Hartwig, _Meistersch._ p. 320; Dümmler in _Berl. Phil. Woch._ 1888,
  p. 20; Kretschmer, p. 81.

Footnote 2145:

  Ar. _Thesm._ 1084–1225.

Footnote 2146:

  Kretschmer also hints that it seems to indicate the pronunciation of
  F by the Athenians as PH in “hap-hazard,” not as F.

Footnote 2147:

  There are also isolated instances of ???afe; Timonidas of Corinth,
  Pheidippos, Euthymides, and Aristophanes. See Klein, _Meisters._ p.
  13.

Footnote 2148:

  B.M. F 594.

Footnote 2149:

  Gardner, _Ashmolean Vases_, No. 189, pl. 26: ??e??µe?se? ?µ?
  ????f????. We are reminded of the jest about Chairestratos made by
  the comic poet Phrynichos, who speaks of “Chairestratos soberly
  pottering (?e?aµe???) at home” (Athen. xi. 474 B).

Footnote 2150:

  See list at end of chapter, and Klein, _op. cit._ pp. 49, 213, 214.

Footnote 2151:

  Munich 378 = Furtwaengler and Reichhold, pl. 14. See Vol. I. p. 428.

Footnote 2152:

  Klein, _Meistersig._ p. 111.

Footnote 2153:

  G 107: see _Monuments Piot_, ix. p. 33.

Footnote 2154:

  Naples 3415.

Footnote 2155:

  Munich 498 = Reinach, i. 215.

Footnote 2156:

  _Cat._ 1152.

Footnote 2157:

  Munich 380, 810 = Reinach, ii. 115, i. 363.

Footnote 2158:

  Louvre E 852 = Reinach, i. 156.

Footnote 2159:

  Reinach, ii. 292.

Footnote 2160:

  _E.g._ B.M. F 62.

Footnote 2161:

  See also Kretschmer, p. 84.

Footnote 2162:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 164, B 254; Louvre F 297 = Reinach, ii. 26.

Footnote 2163:

  Kretschmer, p. 85: see p 92.

Footnote 2164:

  Munich 6: see Vol. I. p. 428, and Hoppin, _Euthymides_, p. 18.

Footnote 2165:

  _Monuments Piot_, ix. pl. 2.

Footnote 2166:

  Berlin 1737.

Footnote 2167:

  Munich 333 = Reinach, ii. 119.

Footnote 2168:

  Berlin 1704 = Reinach, i. 198; Vol. I. p. 326.

Footnote 2169:

  Berlin 1732 = Reinach, ii. 66.

Footnote 2170:

  Plate XXIII.: see Vol. I. p. 326.

Footnote 2171:

  Bibl. Nat. 219.

Footnote 2172:

  Louvre F 385 = Millingen, _Anc. Uned. Mon._ pl. 38.

Footnote 2173:

  Reinach, ii. 49.

Footnote 2174:

  Kretschmer, p. 86.

Footnote 2175:

  Reinach, ii. 128.

Footnote 2176:

  Kretschmer, pp. 86, 197.

Footnote 2177:

  See Kretschmer, p. 86.

Footnote 2178:

  _Cat._ 1158 = _Ath. Mitth._ 1884, pl. 1.

Footnote 2179:

  Kretschmer, _loc. cit._: cf. Bergk, _Poet. lyr. Gr._ iii.^4 p. 97,
  frag. 23.

Footnote 2180:

  See Hartwig, _Meistersch._ p. 255.

Footnote 2181:

  Petersburg 1670. The Doric dialect is explained by Kretschmer as due
  to the Sicilian origin of the game.

Footnote 2182:

  _Sc._ “hard to beat.”

Footnote 2183:

  Kretschmer, p. 88.

Footnote 2184:

  _I.e._ ??ß?st?t???.

Footnote 2185:

  Reinach, i. 294. Probably, as Kretschmer points out, a dog of Melita
  off Illyricum, not of Malta.

Footnote 2186:

  Kretschmer, p. 91.

Footnote 2187:

  Benndorf, _Gr. u. sic. Vasenb._ pl. 1.

Footnote 2188:

  Helbig, 186 = _Wiener Vorl._ 1889, pl. 8, 6.

Footnote 2189:

  Reinach, i. 96.

Footnote 2190:

  Reinach, i. 106.

Footnote 2191:

  This translation is somewhat doubtful: see Reinach, _loc. cit._

Footnote 2192:

  _Cat._ 688 = Reinach, i. 164.

Footnote 2193:

  Reinach, i. 513.

Footnote 2194:

  Athens 1241 = Dumont-Pottier, i. pl. 6.

Footnote 2195:

  Plate XXXIX.

Footnote 2196:

  On the form of the ? see below, p. 268.

Footnote 2197:

  _Brit. Sch. Annual_, 1898–99, p. 65.

Footnote 2198:

  Reinach, i. 277: see on the subject, _Hermes_, 1898, p. 640; _Notizie
  degli Scavi_, 1895, 86 ff.; and above, pp. 115, 137.

Footnote 2199:

  See on this subject, Urlichs, _Beiträge_, p. 33 ff., and Vol. I. p.
  389.

Footnote 2200:

  Athen. xi. 466 D; not found on Attic vases, but cf. B.M. F 548.

Footnote 2201:

  B.M. B 415, 422; Berlin 1775–76.

Footnote 2202:

  Berlin 1764; Munich 37. For variations see Kretschmer, p. 195.

Footnote 2203:

  See Klein, _Meisters._ p. 110; Kretschmer, p. 82.

Footnote 2204:

  Instances are B.M. B 330, B 339, B 631, E 182, E 718.

Footnote 2205:

  _E.g._ B.M. B 400.

Footnote 2206:

  _Cat._ 334 = Reinach, i. 79. The vase is probably by Charinos.

Footnote 2207:

  Cf. the story of Pericles and Sophocles told by Cicero, _De Offic._
  i. 40, 144.

Footnote 2208:

  _Vasen mit Lieblingsinschriften_, 2nd edn., 1898. Of these, 528 are
  masculine names, and only 30 feminine.

Footnote 2209:

  143 ff. There is, of course, a play here on the word ??ast??.

Footnote 2210:

  97 ff. Demos is here a proper name; ??µ?? means the ballot-box, in
  which the juries recorded their votes.

Footnote 2211:

  Cf. Frazer’s note on Paus. vi. 10, 6 (vol. iv. p. 37).

Footnote 2212:

  Such as the Laches ?a??? on Berlin 2314, a name which recalls the
  Platonic dialogue with that title.

Footnote 2213:

  Hartwig, _Meistersch._ pl. 17, 1.

Footnote 2214:

  Reinach, ii. 94.

Footnote 2215:

  Hartwig in _Mélanges d’Arch._ 1894, p. 10 note.

Footnote 2216:

  The name of Leagros occurs on many vases by Euphronios and other
  artists: see Klein, _Lieblingsinschr._^2 p. 70 ff.

Footnote 2217:

  Klein, _Lieblingsinschr._^2 p. 87 = _Ashmolean Vases_, No. 310.

Footnote 2218:

  See for this section, Kretschmer, p. 94 ff.

Footnote 2219:

  See Kretschmer, p. 98.

Footnote 2220:

  See Vol. I. p. 326.

Footnote 2221:

  But see p. 271 for the probable explanation of this use of ?.

Footnote 2222:

  Kretschmer, p. 146.

Footnote 2223:

  Naples 2899; B.M. E 156.

Footnote 2224:

  Louvre F 53 = Reinach, ii. 59 (Exekias).

Footnote 2225:

  Berlin 2291.

Footnote 2226:

  Munich 340 = _C.I.G._ 7433.

Footnote 2227:

  B.M. E 224; Karlsruhe 209: cf. Berlin 2184 ([???SS??S]) and 1906
  ([????????S]).

Footnote 2228:

  Kretschmer, p. 179.

Footnote 2229:

  _Ibid._ p. 180.

Footnote 2230:

  Munich 334.

Footnote 2231:

  See generally Kretschmer, p. 110 ff.

Footnote 2232:

  The two Proto-Attic inscribed vases (Berlin 1682 and _Art. Denkm._ i.
  57: see Vol. I. p. 293).

Footnote 2233:

  Berlin 2008; _Röm. Mitth._ 1886, p. 21.

Footnote 2234:

  See the table given by Kretschmer, p. 105.

Footnote 2235:

  See Vol. I. p. 443, and Dümmler’s article in _Jahrbuch_, 1887, p. 168
  ff.

Footnote 2236:

  See Kretschmer, p. 211 ff.

Footnote 2237:

  For the proof that Assteas and Python worked at Paestum, see Vol. I.
  p. 479.

Footnote 2238:

  The name is perhaps a by-form of Dasimos (see Vol. I. p. 478). The
  correspondence of D and L is not uncommon, as in da???? = _lacrima_.

Footnote 2239:

  F 62, [????O?]; F 92, [???SS??S]. See also Millingen-Reinach, pls.
  14, 17, 18.

Footnote 2240:

  Cf. the version given by Eustathius _ad Odyss._ p. 1698, 25.

Footnote 2241:

  Kretschmer, p. 218; _Rev. Arch._ xii. (1888), p. 344.

Footnote 2242:

  Rayet and Collignon, p. 330 (in Louvre): see above, p. 186; also Vol.
  I. p. 488.

Footnote 2243:

  One kylix in partnership with Nikosthenes.

Footnote 2244:

  In one case as potter for Epiktetos.

Footnote 2245:

  See also Vol. I. p. 440.




                                PART IV
                             ITALIAN POTTERY




                             CHAPTER XVIII
                  _ETRUSCAN AND SOUTH ITALIAN POTTERY_

    Early Italian civilisation—Origin of Etruscans—Terramare
      civilisation—Villanuova
      period—Pit-tombs—Hut-urns—Trench-tombs—Relief-wares and painted
      vases from Cervetri—Chamber-tombs—Polledrara ware—Bucchero
      ware—Canopic jars—Imitations of Greek vases—Etruscan
      inscriptions—Sculpture in terracotta—Architectural
      decoration—Sarcophagi—Local pottery of Southern Italy—Messapian
      and Peucetian fabrics.


In the succeeding section of this work we propose, by a natural
transition, to deal with Italian pottery, that is, Etruscan and Roman,
as distinct from Greek. The subject naturally falls under three
heads—the first two dealing with the pottery of the period previous to
the Roman domination of Italy, and therefore contemporaneous with the
Greek pottery; the third with Roman pottery from the second century
B.C. onwards, and of necessity including also remains of similar
pottery from Gaul, Britain, and other countries over which that
civilisation extended.

In the present chapter the first two branches of the subject—namely,
Etruscan pottery, and the local fabrics of Southern Italy—will be
discussed; the period of time which they cover is, as has been said,
coincident with that covered by the history of Greek pottery, extending
from the Bronze Age down to the end of the third century B.C.

                         § 1. ETRUSCAN POTTERY


                              BIBLIOGRAPHY

    Helbig, _Die Italiker in der Poebene_; _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1884, p.
      108 ff., 1885, p. 5 ff.; Karo, _Cenni sulla cronologia
      preclassica_, Parma, 1898; Von Duhn in _Bonner Studien_, p. 21
      ff., and in _J.H.S._ xvi. p. 125 ff.; Martha, _L’Art Étrusque_,
      _passim_; Dennis, _Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria_, 2nd edn.
      (good for topography; archaeology out of date); _J.H.S._ xiv. p.
      206 ff. (C. Smith on Polledrara ware); Gsell, _Fouilles de
      Vulci_; Pottier, _Cat. des vases ant. du Louvre_, ii. p. 285 ff.
      (the best general survey); _Notizie degli Scavi_, _passim_, for
      excavations; _Brit. Mus. Cat. of Bronzes_, p. xliv ff.

                     (1) EARLY ITALIAN CIVILISATION

As regards Etruria, it will be seen that the art of the people was
largely imitative, being derived mainly from Greece, but in some
measure also from the East. Few remains of their productions have
reached the present day, with the exception of large numbers of vases,
bronzes, and jewellery; these, however, afford a very clear notion of
the characteristics of Etruscan art. It is hardly possible to treat the
subject of working in clay in Etruria with such fulness as can be done
in the case of Greece and Rome, owing to the greater dearth of
literature; but in our previous chapter (III.) on this subject much has
already been said with reference to what is known on this head. In
regard to the pottery, careful scientific excavations, such as those
undertaken by M. Gsell at Vulci (Vol. I. p. 77), have done much to
increase our knowledge of all periods, and to place chronological
certainty within the reach of the inquirer.

In dealing with the history of art in Italy, we are naturally first met
with two questions: (1) Who were the earliest inhabitants of the
country, particularly in the region afterwards known as Etruria, in
which the first signs of artistic development appear? (2) At what
period and from what quarter did the Etruscans occupy this region, or
are they aboriginal? It will therefore be necessary to devote a few
preliminary paragraphs to these much-debated questions,[2246] in order
to gain a better understanding of the subsequent history.

The question of the origin of the Etruscans, to take the second first,
is as old as Herodotos.[2247] As is well known, the Father of History
held to the view that they originally came from Lydia, a view which
found general support in antiquity, and is referred to by Horace,[2248]
and many other writers. His fellow-townsman Dionysios was, however, of
the opinion that they were autochthonous.[2249] However much of truth
there may be in either of these theories, the fact remains that with
certain modifications each of the two alternatives has found supporters
even down to the present day, though to Niebuhr first is due the
suggestion that the immigration of the Etruscans was by land and not by
sea, and that they came from Central Europe by way of the Rhaetian
Alps. He has been followed by most writers since—above all by Mommsen,
who was the first to point out the absurdity of identifying the Lydian
???????? or ?????ß?? with the Italian _Tusci_ or _Etrusci_. It follows
from this that the whole of the civilisation of Northern and Central
Italy is due to this race, which would obviously have left its impress
on each district as it passed through it; and, secondly, that it was
this same race that was afterwards known by the name of Etruscan.

The chief objection to the theory of an autochthonous origin is that,
as we shall presently see, a break in the civilisation of Northern
Italy which can be traced about the beginning of the ninth century B.C.
is of such a marked and rapid character that it cannot be regarded as
due to any cause but the irruption of a new race. Moreover, there is
probably, as M. Pottier points out,[2250] more truth in the words of
Herodotos than appears at first sight. It is true that there are no
grounds for accepting the Lydian theory absolutely; but apart from
this, it is to be noted that Herodotos nowhere states that the
Tyrrhenians landed on the west coast of Italy—_i.e._ in Etruria. What
he does say is that, “after having visited (or coasted along) many
nations, they arrived at the Umbrians, where they founded cities and
inhabit them to this day; and instead of Lydians, their name was
changed to that of Tyrrhenians.” Additional evidence is given by
Hellanikos,[2251] who explicitly states that they landed at the mouth
of the Po; and as the Umbrians probably occupied a larger territory in
prehistoric than in classical times,[2252] we may fairly place here the
city of Tyrsenia or Tyrrhenia, which Herodotos gives as the name of
their first new home. Thus the Umbrians will represent the early
aborigines whose civilisation, known as the Terramare, we shall
presently describe, and it was this civilisation, transformed and
developed, which was carried by the invaders over the Apennines into
the region now to be known as Etruria. It will be noted that this
theory at least satisfactorily combines the land and sea migrations of
the Etruscans into Etruria, though it does not profess to dogmatise as
to the region whence they first started. The idea that they first
landed on the west coast is entirely due to Roman ideas, fostered by
poets like Virgil; and though it is in one passage accepted by
Dionysios of Halicarnassos, he expressly contradicts himself in
another.[2253]

The two chief characteristics of this new Etrusco-Umbrian civilisation
are the development of geometrical decoration and the predominance of a
metallurgic element, both of which are obviously derived from Eastern
sources, whether Hellenic or Oriental. It will suffice here to point
out that the “Tyrrhenians” during their previous voyages (see above)
might well have come in contact with the other civilisations of the
Eastern Mediterranean, such as Cyprus, Asia Minor, Mycenae, and the
Greek islands, and that their natural acquisitiveness and capacity for
imitation, which we shall find illustrated throughout their history,
enabled them to pick up and use artistic ideas from all these quarters.
Even their earliest art yields many points of comparison with that of
the Eastern Mediterranean.

The earliest civilisation of which traces have survived in Italy is, as
we have already seen, that of the Terramare, so called from the remains
discovered in that district, covering the basin of the Eridanus or Po,
but chiefly between Piacenza and Bologna. We have further seen that the
aboriginal people to whom these remains belong are probably to be
identified with the Umbrians, but it is perhaps safer to style them
Italiotes. They were lake-dwellers, living in wooden houses built on
piles in the water or in the marshy lagoons of the district which they
inhabited, and their civilisation was of the rudest description.

We find among their remains, besides rude objects in bronze and other
substances, pottery of the very simplest kinds, hand-made and roughly
baked. This is not found in tombs, but mingled with the débris of the
dwellings. The shapes comprise cups and pots, and there are few
attempts at decoration beyond rows of knobs or bosses. A
crescent-shaped or lunulated handle is attached to many of the vases,
serving as a support for the thumb; but this is a feature also found in
other parts of Italy and in Sicily. Iron, glass, and silver are quite
unknown, and gold only represented by a doubtful specimen; on the other
hand, along with the finds of bronze, which include weapons, tools, and
objects of toilet, are survivals of the Neolithic Age in the shape of
axes, spear-heads, and tools of stone. In several of the settlements
actual moulds for bronze-casting were found.

The Neolithic remains are sufficient to indicate the early date of this
civilisation, and it is probably contemporary in point of development
(if not of date) with the earliest remains from Hissarlik and Cyprus.
It may thus be traced back as far as 1500 B.C. at least, and seems to
extend down to about the end of the tenth century B.C. The analogous
pottery found at Thapsus in Sicily is mixed with Mycenaean vases, and
may therefore be more precisely dated; but it is altogether more
advanced than that of the Terramare. The influence of the latter no
doubt spread gradually downwards during these thousand years through
Central and Southern Italy.[2254]

              (2) THE VILLANUOVA PERIOD (TOMBS _A POZZO_)

The next stage in the development of civilisation in Italy, probably
separated from the preceding by a period of transition, is what is
known as the Villanuova period, from a site of that name at Bologna. It
begins with the ninth century B.C., and lasts for some two hundred
years; its traces are much more widely spread than those of the
Terramare people, being found not only to the north of the Apennines,
but all over Etruria. It is interesting to note that the chief finds
have been made in what afterwards became the principal centres of
Etruscan civilisation, such as Bologna, Corneto, Vetulonia, etc. In
almost every respect it shows a marked development on the preceding
stage. Iron is already known, and the working of bronze better
understood, the processes of hammering plates (sf????at??) and working
in _repoussé_ being introduced to supplement that of casting.[2255]

We now for the first time meet with tombs, the characteristic form of
which is that of a well or pit, ending in a small circular chamber, in
which the remains are deposited. Italian archaeologists have given to
these tombs the name of _a pozzo_. The method of burial practised was
almost exclusively that of incineration, but it appears certain that
the inhabitants of Etruria never showed a special preference either for
one method or the other, and the alternative method of inhumation
already appears at Corneto before the next stage is reached with the
eighth century.

It has been sometimes objected that the introduction of inhumation must
connote the first arrival of the Etruscan people in these regions, on
the ground that they did not practise incineration; but this idea rests
on no sound basis. The introduction of the new system, which never
entirely ousted incineration, can easily be explained as due to
external influences; not indeed to the Phoenicians (although it was a
universal Oriental custom), for their influence in Italy has been much
exaggerated; but rather to the Greeks, who colonised Cumae in the
middle of the eighth century, from which time onwards Hellenic
influence gradually becomes more and more apparent.

We have seen, then, that the Villanuova civilisation may be fairly
regarded as Etruscan. It was not, however, by any means confined to
Etruria, for it is spread all over the country to the north of the
Apennines, and two of its most important centres were at Bologna and
Este. The whole of this region shows traces of having been for a long
time under the early Etruscan domination. It is, in fact, in close
dependence on the Terramare civilisation which here preceded it, the
difference, as we have indicated, being brought about by commerce and
foreign influences.

[Illustration:

  From _Ann. dell’ Inst._
  FIG. 178. TOMB _A POZZO_
  WITH CINERARY URN.
]

The _pozzo_ tombs usually contain a large cinerary urn or _ossuarium_,
in which the ashes were placed after being burnt (Fig. 178).[2256]
These urns are fashioned by hand from a badly levigated volcanic clay,
generally known as _impasto Italico_. It is to be distinguished from
the later _bucchero nero_ (see p. 301) by its quality, and by the fact
that vases of the latter clay are always wheel-made. The clay is
irregularly baked over an open fire, and the colour of the surface
varies from red-brown to greyish black. It is covered with a polished
slip, and there is no doubt that it was the intention of the potter to
give the vases a metallic appearance as well as form.

As regards their shape, they are of a peculiar but uniform type, with a
small handle at the widest part, and cover in the form of an inverted
bowl or saucer with handle (Fig. 179: see also Fig. 178).[2257] The
ornamentation consists of geometrical ornaments incised or stamped in
bands round the neck and body—such as maeanders, chevrons, stars, and
dots—the incisions being made while the clay was moist. In rare cases
we meet with painted ornaments in white applied directly to the
surface. Besides the urns, which often almost fill the chamber,
accessory objects in the form of common pottery, fibulae, and other
bronze objects, spindle-whorls and amber objects, are found in the
tombs.

The common pottery does not in its character exhibit much advance on
that of the Terramare. The difference, indeed, consists not so much in
development of technique as in a greater variety of decoration. It has
points of resemblance with the far earlier pottery of Hissarlik and the
early Bronze Age tombs of Cyprus (see Chapter VI.), and there are not
wanting evidences of commercial intercourse with and importation from
the Eastern Mediterranean. But two salient features of the Italian
wares are the employment of handles and the unique form of the hut-urn
(see below).

[Illustration:

  From _Notizie degli Scavi_.
  FIG. 179. CINERARY URNS FROM TOMBS OF VILLANUOVA PERIOD AT CORNETO.
]

The clay is mostly of the same kind as that of the urns, and the smoked
and irregularly fired surface shows that furnaces were not yet in use,
but that an open fire sufficed for the purpose. The technique is
exceedingly primitive, and the forms are simple but heavy. In the
latter respect the striking difference in the inherent artistic
capacity of the Greeks and Italians is already apparent. The latter
never at any time displayed that unfailing eye for form which
distinguishes the Greeks in all their products. The shapes include
saucers like the urn-covers, bowls with a flat vertical or high-looped
handle, flasks with long beak-like necks like the early Cypriote vases,
bowls with small feet, jars with one or two handles, _aski_, and
_kerni_, or groups of vases united on one stem.

Many of these are quite plain, but the majority are decorated with
geometrical patterns, like the _ossuaria_ or urns already described.
Some of the patterns show quite a mechanical regularity, as if produced
from a stamp. These take the form of circular sinkings and other
patterns formed by circles, an early instance of a motive which
afterwards became common in Etruria. There are even some instances of
designs in colour, a sort of cream pigment being used. A peculiarity of
this class is the fondness for protuberances in the form of horns on
the handles (_ansae lunulatae_), which are also found in the Terramare,
as already mentioned; or knobs round the body of the vase, in order to
hold cords for suspension, which afterwards served a merely decorative
purpose, like the bosses on cups described by Homer.[2258] Sometimes
are to be seen rude attempts at modelling horses or heads of oxen, or
at giving the whole vase the form of a bird, as is seen in some of the
_aski_.[2259]

The absence of accessory vases in Villanuova tombs, as is sometimes the
case at Vulci,[2260] seems to show either very great antiquity or else
a long survival of an older type. On the whole, however, a
chronological classification is hardly possible. Generally speaking,
the pit-tombs were still in use throughout Etruria at the end of the
eighth century, and no tombs of the next stage can be dated earlier
than 700 B.C. The line of demarcation for the latter end of the period
is therefore the seventh century, coincident with the first undoubtedly
Greek importations found in the tombs.

The real interest of the Villanuova period is, however, centred in
remains which do not come within our province—namely, the objects in
bronze which have been found in such enormous numbers at Bologna,
Vetulonia, and elsewhere.[2261] They fall into line with the earliest
remains on Hellenic sites—such as Olympia, Rhodes, and Crete—and a
connection can often be traced, as in the fibulae, with the Hallstatt
civilisation.[2262] On the other hand, they are entirely free from any
Oriental influence.

Sometimes the cinerary urns in the tombs of this period take the form
of huts (_tuguria_), though these are more often found in the
neighbourhood of Rome, as at Alba Longa. They represent, in fact, the
civilisation of the Italiote people on their first arrival in Latium,
which they probably colonised by moving southward through Umbria and
Picenum, leaving Tuscany to the Etruscans. One of the best examples of
these hut-urns is that from the Hamilton collection in the British
Museum (Plate LVII. fig. 4), which still contains ashes. The ashes were
inserted through a little door, which was secured by a cord passing
through two rings at its side and tied round the vase. The
ornamentation suggests the rude carpentry which was applied to the
construction of the dwellings of this primitive people, the cover or
roof being vaulted, with raised ridges intended to represent the beams
of a house or cottage. These urns have no glaze on their surface, but a
polish was produced by friction. They are occasionally painted with
patterns in white, inlaid in grooves. On the Museum example are
fragments of maeander. They are usually found inside large vases, which
protected them from falling earth and other accidents. The fact that
they were found under beds of lava originally led to an exaggerated
opinion of their antiquity, but in any case the nature of their
contents confirms their very primitive use.[2263]

An interesting account of the early settlements in the southern
extremity of Etruria is given by Von Duhn,[2264] as the result of
exploration by local archaeologists on the sites of Falerii (Civita
Castellana) and Narce.[2265] The most interesting feature of these
results is the gradual migration of the peoples from the hill-tops to
the valleys as they became more civilised. Thus many modern cities,
such as Florence, are direct descendants of the early hill-settlements
of primitive Italy. In Etruria it was usually the reclaiming of the
marshes for cultivation that enabled the population to settle in the
lower and more accessible situations.

The Faliscan region well illustrates this principle, as does Narce. In
the earliest graves on the hill-tops cremation is the rule, and the
urns are of the Villanuova type. Nothing of later date than the eighth
century is found, and no importations. The hut-dwellings at Narce seem
to have been of the hut-urn type. The common pottery is of the
primitive hand-made greyish black clay; but after the eighth century
the position of the settlement was shifted lower down, and in these
later tombs a remarkable series of red-glazed wares is found (see
below, p. 301), and Greek and Oriental importations soon make their
appearance. Narce soon fell under Etruscan sway, but Falerii retained
its individuality for some time longer.

       (3) THIRD PERIOD: TOMBS _A FOSSA_; FIRST GREEK INFLUENCES

The next stage in the development of Etruscan civilisation is marked by
a change in the form of the tomb. The pit is now replaced by a trench;
in other words, the vertical form is exchanged for a horizontal one.
Concurrently with this change the practice of inhumation becomes fairly
general. This period may be regarded as extending from the eighth
century B.C. to the beginning of the sixth, and is marked by the first
signs of importations from Greece in the shape of Geometric pottery and
bronzes. In general character it is not strongly marked off from the
preceding. The great advance is in the development of art in the
objects found in the tombs. Not only do we witness the first beginnings
of what is destined to become the typical species of Etruscan
pottery—namely, the _bucchero nero_—but towards the end of the period
the Greek influence, as evidenced by finds of wheel-made vases with
Geometrical decoration, or even of the so-called Proto-Corinthian type,
becomes widely felt. It was no doubt largely due to the foundation of
colonies in the south of Italy, such as Cumae. Altogether it is a most
important period for the history of Etruscan pottery. Of Oriental
influence there are at present hardly any signs, and all wheel-made
vases found in these tombs are probably of Greek origin, as it does not
appear that the wheel was in regular use before the middle of the sixth
century.[2266]

It is now necessary to turn our attention to the local hand-made
varieties. And, in the first place, it is worthy of note that pottery
of the Villanuova type actually survives the transition from the
pit-tombs to the trenches, as is seen at Corneto, Vetulonia, and
elsewhere. Probably it indicates the pottery in common use, the
imported objects being only regarded as _de luxe_; or else, as Prof.
Helbig suggests,[2267] the former types were preserved for religious
reasons connected with burial rites, as was often the case in Roman
religion.

In the earlier types of pottery from the _fossa_ tombs, such as are
common at Vulci, the hand-made pottery of _impasto Italico_ still
continues, preserving the same shapes and the same simple linear
decoration; but it is better baked, and the surface is somewhat better
polished. Red wares are also found, and yellow wares with Geometrical
ornaments painted in red, which are evidently local imitations of the
Greek Geometrical fabrics (see below).

Later, while the technique remains unaltered, a difference is seen in
the forms, which become lighter, more varied, and more symmetrical.
Such shapes as the stamnos, kantharos, and trefoil-mouthed oinochoë now
for the first time appear. The methods of ornamentation are also
modified; new varieties of incised patterns are seen, and the bodies of
the vases are sometimes fluted or ribbed; while such motives as friezes
of ducks, which are also found on the contemporary bronzes,[2268] now
first find a place. M. Gsell, describing in detail the various fabrics
found in the Vulci tombs of this period,[2269] speaks of pottery of a
grey clay baked to red, perhaps in a furnace, forming urns and jars of
a considerable size. He thinks that some primitive kind of wheel (see
above) must have been used to produce these. In some of the _impasto_
wares there is a decided advance in technique, the clay being better
levigated and the walls of the vases thinner. Some black wares seem to
have been _fumigated_ like the later _bucchero_. Generally speaking,
both incineration and inhumation are still practised.

The ornaments are incised, stamped, or painted, and the decoration
almost exclusively linear, the stamped patterns being usually in the
form of stars. This pottery is, in fact, merely a continuation of that
of the pit-tombs, except that the imitation of metal-work is much more
strongly in evidence.

Yet another variety preserves the methods and forms of the Villanuova
class, but introduces a new kind of clay, altogether black, as
distinguished from the earlier reds and browns. A remarkable specimen
of this early black ware found at Orvieto has incised upon it the
subject of Bellerophon and the Chimaera, the style being, as we should
expect, childish to the verge of the ludicrous.[2270] Later, the black
wares acquire a very fair glazed surface, and are ornamented with
incised linear patterns of zigzags, chevrons, etc.; these are mostly
small vases. It is in these two particularly that we see the
forerunners of the highly developed _bucchero_ ware.

Besides these local fabrics, there are found Greek imported wares with
Geometrical decoration of pale yellow clay, with ornaments in brown
turning to red; the commonest form is the oinochoë, and the patterns
include circles, zigzags, wavy lines, embattled patterns, etc. These
are all wheel-made, and are, in fact, the same types as are found in
the Dipylon cemetery at Athens and in Boeotia (Chapter VII.); the
earliest instances belong to the end of the eighth century, in some
late pit-tombs at Caere, in which also “Proto-Corinthian” pottery was
found. They coincide with the great impetus given to Greek colonisation
in Sicily and Southern Italy, and probably came by that way into
Etruria. It should be borne in mind that these vases were imported not
for their own merit, but for the value of their contents. It has
already been mentioned that local imitations of them are found in the
trench-tombs.

To the seventh century belong also two classes of pottery which are
more or less connected, and are chiefly associated with Caere.[2271]
The first class consists of a series of vases of red ware, mostly large
jars and p????, ornamented with designs in relief, the lower part of
the body being usually ribbed. The designs take the form of bands of
figures stamped round the upper part of the vase, either in groups on
the principle of the metope or in extended friezes. In the former case
the design was produced from a single stamp for each group; in the
latter, it was rolled out from a cylinder resembling those in use in
Assyria for sealing documents. Besides the jars, plates of this ware
are not uncommon; they may have formed either covers like those of the
Villanuova _ossuaria_, or stands for the jars, in order to hold
drippings of liquid, etc. The use of the p???? in tombs is not quite
clear, though they were doubtless in daily use for holding grain or
liquids.[2272]

The subjects are always of an Orientalising character, similar to those
found on Greek vases under Oriental influence, and comprising animals,
monsters, hunting scenes, combats, and banquets. The origin of these
vases is doubtful; they may be either indigenous or imported, as
similar examples have been found in Rhodes, Boeotia, Sicily, and
elsewhere; but they are rare outside Etruria. The suggestion of a
Sicilian origin[2273] has found some favour, but it is more likely that
they are native productions after Greek models (see Vol. I. p. 496);
some are undoubtedly of local make,[2274] and they were probably made
at Caere or in the neighbourhood. Their prototypes go back almost to
the Mycenaean period, but were hardly imported before 700 B.C., after
which time the local imitations begin, being one more instance of the
invariable rule that all Etruscan pottery is more or less imitative.
Similar vases in metal were manufactured on the coast of Asia Minor,
and the ??a??µata of the Lydian kings at Delphi[2275] were probably
examples of this class.[2276]

[Illustration:

  From _Gaz. Arch._
  FIG. 180. PAINTED ETRUSCAN PITHOS FROM CERVETRI (IN LOUVRE): BIRTH
  OF ATHENA; BOAR-HUNT.
]

The second class shows some affinities to the other in regard to the
shape and the nature of the clay; but the important difference is that
the vases are decorated with _painted_ subjects instead of reliefs. The
subjects are painted in white outline on a brick-red glazed ground, the
process being as follows: The clay, which resembles the _impasto
Italico_, is first hardened by baking, and then a mixture of wax and
resin and iron oxide is applied to it, and a lustre given to the
surface by polishing. The pigment, a mixture of chalk and lime, is then
laid on. The process can hardly be said to be Greek, and yet the
subjects are purely Greek, being borrowed in part from the Greek
Geometrical vases, such as sea-fights, and in part from later (Ionian)
sources[2277]; we actually find representations of the Birth of Athena
and the Hunt of the Calydonian Boar (Fig. 180).[2278] The shapes of the
vases again are certainly local, as are the animal forms, which
resemble those incised on the _bucchero_ wares. The drawing is usually
crude in the extreme. It is interesting to note that on the vase from
which Fig. 180 is taken the potter has painted in white an Etruscan
inscription (not shown in the cut). Another vase of the same class was
found in the Polledrara tomb (see Plate LVI. and p. 300 below). The
method of painting in opaque pigment on a red or black ground is, it
would seem, an Ionian characteristic, being found at Naukratis in the
seventh century (Vol. I. p. 347), and also, as we shall see on other
quasi-Ionic fabrics in Etruria.

Generally speaking, the tombs _a fossa_ are not later than the middle
of the seventh century; evidence of this is given by the absence of
_bucchero_ proper and of Corinthian fabrics. There are, however, traces
of their lingering on even down into the sixth century, as at Vulci,
where Helbig mentions a tomb found in 1884 containing Corinthian vases
of that date.[2279] At Corneto the latest belong to the end of the
seventh century.

          (4) FOURTH PERIOD: CHAMBER TOMBS; ORIENTAL INFLUENCE

Our fourth period, which in many respects shows a close continuity with
that of the tombs _a fossa_, is nevertheless clearly defined by two
circumstances: firstly, the adoption of a new type of tomb, doubtless
developed out of the _fossa_, which takes the form of a large chamber,
and is therefore known as _a camera_; secondly, the influence of
Oriental art, concurrently with an increased influx of importations
from Greece. The period covers about a century of time, from 650 to 550
B.C., and includes several of the largest and most important tombs that
have been found in Etruria, which will demand more or less detailed
treatment. In none, however, were any great finds of pottery made; but
one of these tombs, the Grotta d’ Iside or Polledrara tomb at Vulci,
contained several specimens of exceptional interest.

The simplest form of chamber-tomb consists of a narrow corridor or
d??µ?? leading into a larger chamber; next, the d??µ?? opens into a
square or rectangular vestibule, round which various side-chambers are
attached; finally, the tomb assumes the form of a vast subterranean
edifice composed of several wings, and used for more than one corpse—in
fact, a “family vault.”

While on the one hand the ceramic types of the Villanuova period still
linger on, as in the retention of _ossuaria_ for the receipt of ashes,
on the other the painted Greek vases and the local _bucchero_ wares
increase more and more, and altogether there is a great advance in the
direction of variety and richness. This period saw not only the general
introduction of the wheel into Etruria, but also the introduction of
the alphabet of Western Greece, through Cumae. A vase of _bucchero_
ware found at Vetulonia bears an Etruscan inscription, which can hardly
be much later than 700 B.C.,[2280] and we have already seen an instance
on a vase from Caere.

In the earlier chamber-tombs no _bucchero_ is found, and the pottery is
of the same types as in the trench-tombs; but with the enlarged
arrangement of the tomb come the Corinthian vases of Orientalising
style, to be followed later by the Ionian and later Corinthian fabrics,
and finally by the Athenian wares. The vestibule disappears after the
sixth century, and all later tombs have the simple d??µ??. The typical
contents of a chamber-tomb are, as regards local pottery, in the
earlier tombs _impasto Italico_ wares, in the later _bucchero_. The
former is hand-made, the shapes similar to those found in the
trench-tombs—_i.e._ pots incised with zigzags, circles, and other
patterns, or painted in white. The latest varieties are wheel-made, of
_bucchero_ forms. The latter wares, which are much more numerous, are
evolved from the _impasto_: (1) by the use of the wheel; (2) by the
introduction of the furnace; (3) by extensive imitation of Greek
ceramic and metal forms. The earliest _bucchero_ vases at Vulci and
Corneto synchronise with Corinthian pottery of the middle style, about
630-600 B.C., and they last down to the end of the fifth century.

The appearance of the alphabet seems to point to a marked incursion of
Greek influence in the early part of the seventh century. The story of
the arrival of Demaratos of Corinth, about 665 B.C., with the three
artists whom he brought in his train, Diopos, Eucheir, and
Eugrammos,[2281] is no doubt an echo of this. The progress of Hellenism
was, however, momentarily arrested by the growing power of Carthage,
which may partly account for the temporary Orientalising of Etruscan
civilisation. It is certainly to the Carthaginian influence in Italy
that the Phoenician objects found in the seventh century tombs, such as
the silver bowls of Praeneste, are due. Oriental influence is also seen
in the large tombs at Vulci, Caere, and Vetulonia, but it is hardly so
strong as was at one time supposed; and of late years scholars have
generally recognised that Ionian art and commerce played a much larger
part throughout in the civilisation of Etruria[2282]; and, further,
that Oriental art found its way mainly through these channels. At all
events there was throughout the seventh and sixth centuries a keen
struggle for supremacy in the Western Mediterranean, in which the
Etruscans, the Phoenicians of Carthage, and the Ionian and Continental
Greeks alike shared; and hence the diverse influences at work in
Etruria.

But it was not long before Greece, with its rising colonies of Cumae,
Sybaris, and Syracuse, made its predominance to be felt in the Western
Mediterranean, and this was consummated by the final victory of Hiero
over the combined fleets of Carthage and Etruria off Cumae in 474 B.C.
A monument of this exists to the present day in the bronze helmet
dedicated by that king at Olympia, now in the British Museum.

We may further define as the second great period of Greek importations,
that extending over the sixth and fifth centuries, a period which saw
the development not only of the local _bucchero_ fabrics, but also of
the Greek black- and red-figured vases, which, heralded by the
Corinthian wares, now pour in a continuous stream into Etruria. To this
same period belong the paintings of the Etruscan tombs.

The earliest influences from Greece came, as has been hinted, through
colonies like Chalcidian Cumae, which were the chief agents in the
Hellenisation of Etruria; but at Cervetri, at any rate, the prevailing
influence was Corinthian, as testified by the remarkable series of
Corinthian and quasi-Corinthian vases in the Campana collection at the
Louvre. Later in the sixth century came the connection with Athens, the
chief results of which are to be seen in the contents of the tombs of
Vulci (Vol. I. p. 76). It extends from the time of the Peisistratidae
(540-520 B.C.) down to about 450 B.C., being probably brought to an end
by the Peloponnesian War and the destruction of the Athenian maritime
supremacy; but isolated instances of importations occur down to the
time of Alexander the Great, in the Panathenaic amphorae of which dated
examples of 336 B.C. have been found at Cervetri (Vol. I. p. 390).

In sketching this outline of Hellenic influence in Etruria we have
overstepped the limits of chronological sequence, and must retrace our
steps in order to deal first with the local products of the period from
650 B.C. onwards, and secondly with the effects of the Greek
civilisation on the same.

                  *       *       *       *       *

=Polledrara ware.=—The Grotta d’ Iside or Polledrara tomb at Vulci
has been dated, on the authority of a scarab of Psammetichos I.
(656-611 B.C.) which it contained, towards the closing years of the
seventh century. This dating has been generally accepted, and there
seems no reason to doubt it, although the evidence of an isolated
scarab is not always as trustworthy as appears at first sight.
Besides local bronze work and objects of Egyptian or quasi-Egyptian
character, it contained one vase of unique character which calls for
special consideration.[2283]

This is a hydria of somewhat peculiar, if not unique form, with a very
wide body and rudimentary foot. In some details, especially in the
treatment of the handles, it exhibits obvious evidence of imitation of
metal-work. Although at first sight resembling _bucchero_ ware, the
clay is seen on examination to be of a different type, not being grey
but reddish brown in fracture, while the lustrous black surface is
produced by a thin coating or slip. It is decorated with designs in
three colours, red, blue, and a yellowish white, which were laid on the
black and then fired. The red is best preserved, the blue fairly so,
but the white has almost entirely disappeared.[2284] The designs are
arranged in three friezes, of which the lower consists only of isolated
bits of key-pattern. On the two upper rows are scenes from the story of
Theseus and Ariadne, together with Centaurs, Sphinxes, and other
accessory figures. On the upper row Theseus slays the Minotaur; on the
lower, Theseus and Ariadne are seen, firstly in a chariot, secondly
leading a dance of four other figures, the hero playing a lyre, while
Ariadne holds the clue.[2285] The colouring scheme is most elaborate,
and cannot be detailed here; an occasional use of incised lines may
also be noted.

A small two-handled cup or kylix,[2286] of a type often found at
Naukratis decorated with eyes, was also found in this tomb, and appears
to belong to the same class. The clay is similar to that of the hydria,
as is the decoration, which however, owing to the flaking off of the
black slip, has largely disappeared. Although in its technique it
resembles the hydria, the subjects and motives are probably derived
from Naukratis. Only a few other examples of this “Polledrara” ware are
known: an oinochoë in Berlin,[2287] two vases in the Louvre,[2288] and
a vase found at Cervetri, unpublished.[2289] From the contents of the
tomb in which the last-named was found, it may fairly be dated early in
the sixth century.

Mr. Cecil Smith regards the Polledrara hydria as the result of an
Italian attempt to imitate the new _bucchero_ technique which was at
this time being perfected (see below), the form of the vase being
borrowed from an Ionic source.[2290] Ionic influence (see above, p.
296) is visible in more than one respect in this vase, as also in the
reliefs decorating the bronze bust from the same tomb. Other details,
such as the imitation of metal-work, are rather to be referred to a
Corinthian source; and it is worthy of note that two Corinthian vases
were among the contents of the tomb.

The striving after a gaudy effect by the use of polychrome decoration,
and especially the employment of blue, a colour otherwise unknown in
vase-painting before the end of the fifth century, finds a parallel in
the sixth century poros-sculptures from the Athenian Acropolis, in
which even more violent effects of colour are attained, as in the
bright blue beard of the Triton. But in this case there seems little
doubt that the idea is borrowed from Egypt, with its fondness for
brightly decorated mummy-cases and bright blue images of faïence and
porcelain. Other details which betray an Egyptian origin are the lions’
masks, the all-pervading lotos-flower, and the seated dog or jackal.
The connecting link is no doubt the great trading centre of Naukratis,
through whose agency the Egyptian scarabs, porcelain objects, and
ostrich eggs found in this tomb also came to Etruria.

As a parallel to the Polledrara finds should here be cited the painted
terracotta panels from Caere now in the British Museum and Louvre,
which are certainly local products, and give a realistic representation
of the Etruscan people. They are described below (p. 319). These again,
both in subject and style, lead to a comparison with the large Etruscan
terracotta sarcophagi, of which the most remarkable is that in the
British Museum.[2291] Here, as in the Polledrara bronze bust, the rude
native attempts at sculpture in the round are combined with reliefs
which successfully reflect the style of Ionic art. Lastly, we note
another parallel in the paintings of animals on the walls of a tomb at
Veii.[2292]

Mr. Cecil Smith sums up: “The Polledrara ware was probably local
Italian, made at Caere under the combined influence of Ionian and
Naukratite imports, acting on an artistic basis principally derived
from Corinth.” Developed _pari passu_ with the red _impasto_ ware (of
which a painted example was found in the Vulci tomb), it gradually
gave way to the _bucchero_ ware with which we deal in our next
section. It only remains to note that similar ware has been found in
Rhodes,[2293] where also later wares of a genuine _bucchero_ type,
unpainted, have come to light; and these appear to be instances of a
counter-importation from Etruria to Asia Minor.

The only other piece of pottery from the Polledrara tomb which calls
for special comment is one to which reference has just been made, a
large _pithos_ of the primitive _impasto_ red ware, made on the wheel
(Plate LVI.). It falls into line with the painted and stamped fabrics
from Caere already described (p. 292 ff.), and is, like the hydria,
painted in polychrome, but the colours are much faded. The subjects are
a frieze of animals and a ship.

Three other tombs which rival the Polledrara in size and importance are
the Regulini-Galassi tomb at Caere,[2294] the Tomba del Duce at
Vetulonia,[2295] and the Bernardini tomb at Praeneste.[2296] Although
the finds of pottery herein were small, they are yet of great interest
for the history of Etruscan art in general, especially as they afford
evidence for approximate dating. In the two former Etruscan
inscriptions were found. The Caere and Praeneste tombs are probably the
earliest, about 650 B.C., and the Del Duce and Polledrara tombs are not
later than the end of the seventh century.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                               PLATE LVI

[Illustration:

  EARLY ETRUSCAN POTTERY.
  1. CAULDRON AND STAND OF RED WARE FROM FALERII; 2. PAINTED AMPHORA OF
    RED WARE (POLLEDRARA TOMB)
  (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

         ------------------------------------------------------

In the Regulini-Galassi tomb the pottery takes the form of large
caldrons of red glazed ware, which mark a transitional stage between
the _impasto_ and _bucchero_. They are characterised by the large
Gryphons’ heads projecting in relief round the sides, to which are
attached chains. Sometimes they are supported on high open-work stands.
In 1892 the British Museum acquired a series of these and similar vases
(Plate LVI.), including some plain specimens of _bucchero_ ware from
early tombs at Civita Castellana (Falerii: see Vol. I. p. 75).

                  *       *       *       *       *

=Bucchero ware.=—This may be called the national pottery of Etruria.
Its technique is not at present perfectly known, and analysis does not
show certainly whether the black paste is natural or artificial. Modern
experiments have been made which seem to indicate that this result may
be obtained by fumigating or smoking the clay in a closed chamber after
the baking, which process blackens the clay throughout.[2297] But M.
Pottier[2298] thinks that the black surface was obtained not by
fumigation of the vase, but by applying a slip of pounded charcoal
already smoked, which at a moderate temperature would permeate the
clay. The surface was then covered with wax and resin, and polished,
like the Polledrara hydria. A combination of analyses of the paste made
by Brongniart[2299] gives the following result:

                     Silica            60-70 parts.
                     Clay earth        12-16   ”
                     Carbonate of lime  2-4    ”
                     Magnesia           1-2    ”
                     Water             8-10    ”
                     Carbon            1 -3    ”

The oldest _bucchero_ vases go back to the tombs _a fossa_ of the end
of the seventh century. They are small and hand-made, ornamented, if at
all, with geometric patterns, incised. The engraving was done by a sort
of toothed wheel or a sharp tool; more rarely, hollowed out in grooves.
Obviously the process is an imitation of metal engraving. Oriental
influence soon appears, first of all in the chalice-shaped cups found
at Cervetri, the surface of which is covered with figures of lions,
deer, etc., in Oriental style. Both form and decoration are derived
from metallic prototypes. The projecting Gryphons’ heads mentioned
above are also typical of this class.

In tombs of 560-500 B.C., along with Corinthian vases, a different type
occurs, the vases being wheel-made, of light and elegant forms—cups,
chalices, pyxides, amphorae, and jugs.[2300] The ornament is in the
form of reliefs, either stamped from a cylinder on a narrow band, as in
the red ware from Caere (see p. 292), or composed of a series of
medallions separately modelled or made from moulds and stuck on. This,
again, is an imitation of metal. Examples of these types are given in
Plate LVII. figs. 1-3, 5.

The subjects are not very varied. They range from animals such as stags
and lions, or monsters such as Sphinxes and Centaurs, to winged
deities, suppliants with offerings before deities, and other
mythological figures—Chimaera, the Asiatic Artemis, or the Minotaur.
Egyptian masks are also common. Episodes of hunts or banquets
occur,[2301] and also groups of figures in meaningless juxtaposition.
Some vases have only curvilinear patterns, such as palmettes, all of a
vegetable rather than a geometrical type. In this group the general
tendency is rather Hellenic than Oriental, especially towards Ionian
art.[2302] This is only a temporary phase, and is practically confined
to Cervetri, Veii, and Corneto—_i.e._ the maritime region in which the
Corinthian vases are found.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                              PLATE LVII

[Illustration:

  ETRUSCAN BLACK WARE: HUT-URN AND BUCCHERO

  (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

         ------------------------------------------------------

At Chiusi an extraordinary development is manifested, which gradually
obtained a monopoly. The city was far from the sea and Hellenic
influences, and retained Oriental traditions. After the end of the
sixth century all the varieties of _bucchero_ were fused into one type,
which lasted down to the end of the fourth century.[2303] The shapes
include amphorae, trefoil-mouthed oinochoae, various forms of cups,
bowls with raised handles and ladles (kyathi), table-utensils, basins
imitating metal forms, braziers, and vases in the form of birds or
fishes. They are ornamented with reliefs from top to bottom, the
subjects being much the same as in the last group. The tops or covers
are often in the form of female or cows’ heads, or surmounted by birds
(cf. Plate LVII. fig. 5). The figures and ornaments are stamped in from
moulds and fixed by some adhesive medium, incised designs being
inserted to fill up the spaces. These reliefs are never found earlier
than the period of Attic importations.

The subjects are derived as before from Greek, Egyptian, and Assyrian
sources, the Oriental types being so much combined that they must
evidently have come through the Phoenicians. Among the Greek subjects
we find Theseus and the Minotaur, Perseus and the Gorgons, Pegasos and
the Chimaera, warriors, etc. The animals and the four-winged figures
are Assyrian in type, while Egypt supplies such types as Ptah, Anubis,
and other animal-headed deities, and the female heads on the so-called
Canopic jars.

There are here no signs of inventive genius. The technique is purely
native, but all is founded on foreign models.[2304] The shapes are
those of Ionia and the coast of Asia or of Athens. On the other hand,
the development of the technique from the Villanuova pottery is
certainly apparent. The Greeks, indeed, tried to imitate it at times,
and _bucchero_ ware is found at Rhodes and Naukratis. We may fairly lay
down that Etruscan invention is limited to the perfecting of the
technique and the combination of the borrowed elements and art-forms.
Many of the flat reliefs seem to be copied from ivories, and the
rounded reliefs are certainly from bronze _repoussé_ work; in some
cases we find traces of gilding, silvering, and colour, which have been
intended to reproduce the appearance of metal. Again, in many respects
the _bucchero_ vases are merely the counterparts of works in bronze, as
in the case of the braziers and the bowl with Caryatid supports given
in Plate LVII. fig. 2.[2305] In short, they reproduce for us what is
wanting in our knowledge of early Greek metal ware.[2306]

There seem to be some references to this early black ware in the Roman
poets, for Juvenal[2307] mentions it as being in use in the time of
Numa: “Who dared then,” he says, “to ridicule the ladle (_simpuvium_)
and black saucer of Numa?” Persius[2308] styles it _Tuscum fictile_,
and Martial[2309] imagines Porsena to have been quite content with his
dinner-service of Etruscan earthenware.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A peculiarly Etruscan type of vase which deserves some separate
attention is that known as the Canopic jar, resembling the so-called
????p?? in which the Egyptians placed the bowels of their
mummies.[2310] These Etruscan _canopi_ are rude representations of the
human figure, the heads, which are often attired in Egyptian fashion,
forming the covers. The eyes are sometimes inlaid, and the female heads
have large movable earrings and other adornments. In the tombs it was
customary to place these vases on round chairs of wood, bronze, or
terracotta. An example may be seen in the Etruscan Room of the British
Museum, where the chair is plated with bronze, covered with archaic
designs in _repoussé_ relief,[2311] and another is shown in Fig. 181.
Similar chairs were discovered in the _Tomba delle Sedie_ at Cervetri;
but the Canopic jars are almost confined to Chiusi. The type finds a
parallel in the so-called “owl-vases” from the second city at Hissarlik
(Vol. I. p. 258), in which the same combination of the vase-form with
the human figure is to be observed. The lower portion of the jar was
intended to receive the ashes of the dead, like the _ossuaria_, this
method of placing the mortal remains of a person within a
representation of himself being peculiarly Egyptian.

Signor Milani[2312] has traced the origin of the Canopic jars to the
funeral masks placed over the faces of the dead, which are sometimes
found in the earliest Etruscan tombs. This practice may have been
derived from Mycenae, where Schliemann found gold masks in the
shaft-tombs of the Agora; but in Etruria the examples are all in
bronze, except a few of terracotta.[2313] A gradual transition can be
observed from the mask, at first placed on the corpse and then attached
to the urn containing its ashes, to the head fashioned in the round and
assimilated with the cover; while in later times a further transition
may be observed from the vase with human head to the complete human
figure. Finally, its place was taken by the reclining effigies on the
covers of the sarcophagi (p. 320). The earliest jars are found in the
_pozzo_ tombs of the eighth century, the evolution of the head modelled
in the round being accomplished by the seventh century, and the archaic
types last down to about 550 B.C., when the severe perfected style
comes in, to be succeeded by the free style of the fifth century, after
which time the Canopic jars cease to be manufactured.

[Illustration:

  From _Mus. di ant. class._
  FIG. 181. CANOPIC JAR IN CHAIR PLATED WITH BRONZE.
]

The types are both male and female throughout, the latter being usually
distinguished by wearing earrings and necklaces. Towards the end of the
series the handles are gradually converted into rudimentary arms, and
finally into fully developed human arms, sometimes holding attributes.
They are probably placed on chairs as emblems of the power and
authority which the deceased enjoyed during his life. In the Berlin
Museum[2314] there is a remarkable example of the sixth century in
which the jar is placed on a chair of the same clay, covered with
_graffito_ ornamental designs and figures of animals. The jars are
always made of a plain red unglazed clay, and are uncoloured. In the
British Museum[2315] there are two seated female figures on detached
square bases, wearing bright red chitons and large circular earrings,
which seem to represent the period of transition from the jar to the
sarcophagus, the style in which they are modelled being that of the
fifth century. Some of the later examples have strongly individualised
features, and seem to be genuine portraits; it is possible that they
are actually from moulds taken from the faces of the dead.

             (5) PERIOD OF GREEK INFLUENCE; PAINTED POTTERY

Although the Etruscans executed such admirable works in bronze,
exercised with such skill the art of engraving gems, and produced such
refined specimens of filagree-work in gold, they never attained to high
excellence in their pottery. The vases already described belong to
plastic rather than pictorial art, and are mostly imitations of work in
metal. Down to the end of the sixth century B.C. their attempts at
painting vases have been, as we have seen, limited practically to two
fabrics, the Polledrara ware and the Caere jars with paintings in a
similar technique. These methods have, however, nothing in common with
Greek vase-paintings of the ordinary kind on a glazed surface, a method
which was never popularised in Etruria.

The total failure of the Etruscans in vase-painting finds a curious
parallel in their sculpture; all their best work is to be sought in
their engraving or figures in low relief, as in the mirrors and
_cistae_. Yet the same mirrors and _cistae_ show clearly that it was
from no lack of ability in drawing that they failed; wherefore it is
the less easy to understand, not only the absence of all originality in
their painted vases, but also the rarity of instances of their
imitative tendencies in this respect.

Apparently the red-figured vases which were imported into Etruria in
such large numbers in the fifth century served as prototypes, not for
their paintings, but for the engraved mirrors to which we have alluded.
It may have been that they shrank from the task so successfully
achieved by Greek painters of suitably decorating the curved surfaces
of a vase, and preferred the flat even surfaces supplied by the
circular mirrors and the sides of the _cistae_. Moreover, the interior
designs of the kylikes, perfected by Epiktetos, Euphronios, and their
contemporaries, served as obvious models for disposing a design in a
circular space; and they had in the subjects of the vases a
mythological repertory ready to hand.

It now remains to be seen to what extent they actually were influenced
in their pottery by the imported Greek vases.

For considerably over a century painted pottery, at all times rare in
Etruria, is practically unrepresented in the tombs except by Greek
importations, Corinthian, Ionic, and Attic; the only local attempts in
this direction are the Polledrara and Cervetri vases. As we have seen,
early Corinthian vases appear in the _fossa_ tombs, and later
Corinthian in the chamber tombs, in which, towards the middle of the
sixth century, the Attic B.F. fabrics begin to make their appearance.
The latest developments of the Corinthian wares are, indeed, almost
unrepresented, but their place is taken by what appear to be local
imitations of the Corinthian vases, a large series of which was found
at Cervetri, and now forms part of the Campana collection in the
Louvre. These are, however, for the most part certainly Greek, being
presumably made by the Greek settlers in that town—at any rate, an
Etruscan origin cannot be proved for them.[2316]

We have also seen that the Ionian fabrics exercised a great influence
on Etruscan art, and this leads us to another series of vases found at
Cervetri, the Caeretan hydriae discussed in Chapter VIII. Some years
ago it was noticed by the late F. Dümmler[2317] that there were in many
museums examples of a class of vases which stood in close relation to
the Caeretan hydriae, yet were obviously a different fabric. Having
collected and examined these vases, he was able to demonstrate
satisfactorily that they were direct imitations by the Etruscans of the
Caeretan hydriae,[2318] thereby proving at the same time that the
latter were imported from other sources (_sc._ Ionia), and not, as had
hitherto been supposed, themselves of Italian origin. It is not
unlikely that the Ionic influence in Etruria is due to the Phocaean
migration of 544 B.C.; on reaching Italy the Ionian fugitives would
naturally hand on their art-traditions there.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                             PLATE LVIII

[Illustration: ETRUSCAN IMITATIONS OF GREEK VASES (BRITISH MUSEUM).]

         ------------------------------------------------------

These Etruscan vases are not exclusively hydriae, some being amphorae,
others kyathi; but they all bear the unmistakable stamp of Etruscan art
in the drawing of the figures and other small details, such as the
treatment of the incised lines. It will further be noticed that the
drawing is in most cases quite free from archaism, figures being often
drawn in full face or correct profile; and this consequently proves
that they belong to a considerably later date than the fabrics which
they imitate, although the figures are always in black on a red ground.
The style in some cases is not unlike that of the later Panathenaic
amphorae of the fourth century, and may also be compared with some of
the bronze cistae from Palestrina. Accessory pigments are rare, and the
incised lines are sketchy and careless; great prominence is given to
the bands of ornament bordering the designs, this being a feature
borrowed from the Caeretan hydriae. On a large amphora in the British
Museum (B 64) the characteristic Caeretan band of lotos-flowers and
palmettes is exactly reproduced, though in black instead of
polychrome.[2319] Other typical ornaments are the maeander and
chevrons; ivy-leaves and sprigs shooting up from the ground;
lotos-buds, and wreaths of all kinds. The subjects are limited in
range, and thoroughly Etruscan in feeling; Pegasi and beardless
Centaurs with human forelegs, Bacchic subjects, and genre scenes, such
as athletic contests, combats, or funeral ceremonies (Plate LVIII.),
almost complete the list. The turned-up shoes and the pointed _tutuli_
worn by the women, as well as the physiognomy of the figures, with
their receding foreheads, are all characteristically Etruscan, though
the two former details are borrowed from Ionia.[2320] The shapes of the
vases are heavy and inartistic, and the effect altogether unpleasing. A
list of the principal examples is here appended.[2321]

When at last the imitative instincts of the Etruscans did in course of
time impel them to turn their fancy to copying the red-figured vases,
we find the same characteristics reproduced. The number of such
imitations is not large, but they are unmistakable, not only from the
style, but from the pale yellow clay, dull black glaze, and bizarre
character of the ornamentation. Nevertheless, in some cases fairly good
results are obtained, as in the B.M. kylix F 478, which in its interior
design at all events is an obvious attempt to imitate the work of the
great Athenian kylix-painters. The artist seems to have learned his art
from the school of Hieron and Brygos, but his Etruscan instincts are
revealed in the over-elaboration and stiff mannerisms of the drawing.
The Museum also possesses a very fine krater from Falerii (F 479),
which appears to be an example of a local school,[2322] imitating the
red-figured vases of the “fine” period and large style. But these
comparatively successful imitations are exceptional.

The other red-figured Etruscan vases are far inferior, and are executed
in a style which none can fail to recognise. It is dry and lifeless in
the extreme, the drawing helpless, and the whole effect repulsive and
disagreeable, as is so often the case with Etruscan art. These vases
are not earlier than the third century B.C., and may be later. In them
we observe, besides Greek mythological subjects, the introduction of
local deities such as Charun and Ker. The British Museum possesses some
ten examples of this class, in addition to the two already described.
The most interesting is a krater (F 480 = Plate LVIII.), with, on one
side, the death of Aktaeon, designated by his Etruscan name _Ataiun_;
on the other, Ajax, designated _Aifas_, throwing himself upon his
sword, after the award of the armour of Achilles.

Another vase of this class has for its subject the farewell of Admetos
and Alkestis,[2323] with Etruscan inscriptions accompanying the
figures, and a speech issuing from the mouth of one of them. Behind
Admetos is one of the demons of the Etruscan hell, probably intended
for Hades or Thanatos, wearing a short tunic and holding in each hand a
snake. Behind Alkestis is Charun with his mallet. On another vase found
at Vulci[2324] Ajax is represented slaying a Trojan prisoner in the
presence of Charun; and on the reverse the latter appears again with
Penthesileia and two other women. On a third[2325] Leda is represented
showing Tyndareus the egg from which Helen and Klytaemnestra were
destined to be born; it is inscribed _Elinai_, the Etruscan form of
Helen.

The latest specimens of these fabrics, which have been found at Orvieto
and Orbetello, positively degenerate into barbarism[2326]; the figures
are carelessly and roughly painted, and white is extensively used as an
accessory, as in the later Apulian and Campanian vases. The subjects
are usually borrowed from the infernal regions, and the gruesome figure
of Charun is common.

Inscriptions on Etruscan vases are rare as compared with Greek, and in
many cases have only been scratched in after the vase was made. There
are also instances of imported Greek vases on which Etruscan
inscriptions have been incised in this manner, as in the case of a vase
in the form of a lion in the British Museum (A 1137, from Veii), on
which is incised [F??T??] [?T?S??S], _felthur hathisnas_. The earliest
known are incised on plain pots of black ware, and several of these
take the form of what are known as _abecedaria_, or alphabets. Strictly
speaking, some of these alphabets are of Hellenic origin, and do not
give the forms of the Etruscan letters as they are known to us; but as
the latter are derived from the Greek (western group), probably through
Cumae (see above, p. 295) these inscriptions would naturally represent
their original forms in Etruria.

In 1882 an amphora was discovered at Formello near Veii,[2327] on which
this Greek alphabet is written twice from left to right, together with
a retrograde Etruscan inscription, and a “syllabary” or spelling
exercise. The alphabet is as follows: a, ß, ?, d, e, ?, ?, _h_, ?, ?,
?, ?, µ, ?, [samech,], ?, p, ?, ?, ?, s, t, ?, [X], f, ?. This is the
most complete _abecedarium_ extant, containing twenty-six letters and
illustrating the archaic Greek forms of the twenty-two Phoenician
letters in their Semitic order. The four additional ones are ?, [X] ( =
?), f, and ? ( = ?). The character [X] is the representative of
_samech_, and is not found in Greek inscriptions; ? is _shin_ or _san_
(cf. p. 247).

The Caere alphabet, on a vase now in the Museo Gregoriano, is also
combined with an Etruscan syllabary, consisting of such forms as _bi_,
_ba_, _bu_, _be_, _gi_, _ga_, _gu_, _ge_, etc.[2328]; the alphabet
resembles that from Formello, except for the omission of the ?, and the
[san], of the same type, extending as far as ?, was found at Colle near
Siena.[2329] On another small black jar also found at Caere, and now in
the Museo Gregoriano,[2330] is incised an Etruscan inscription in two
lines, in which also the letters are certainly early Greek rather than
Etruscan; these two from Caere must be of the same date as the
Regulini-Galassi tomb, about 650-600 B.C.

[Illustration: FIG. 182. ETRUSCAN ALPHABET, FROM A VASE.]

The two following, however, are genuine Etruscan _abecedaria_: one from
the foot of a cup found at Bomarzo,[2331] on which the alphabet runs
(retrograde): a, ?, e, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ? , µ, ?, p, ?, ?, s, t, ?, f, ?,
f, the other in the museum at Grosseto,[2332] in which the letters are
practically the same, but with the addition of ? and ?. In the first
named the form ? for Z should be noted, and in both occur the _san_ and
two forms of f, which in Etruscan generally appears as [Etrusan phi].
Among other instances of early Etruscan inscriptions are that on the
Louvre vase from Caere, with white paintings on red ground (D 151: see
p. 294), which dates from the seventh century; and on objects from the
Regulini-Galassi and Del Duce tombs (pp. 295, 300). They are, however,
very rare on the pottery of the next two centuries, with the exception
of those incised on the plain pottery, which bear no essential relation
to the vase itself.[2333] These, as has been noted, are also found on
imported Greek wares, one of the best instances being the kylix of
Oltos and Euxitheos, at Corneto,[2334] on the foot of which is an
inscription of thirty-eight letters not divided into words.
Occasionally also painted inscriptions are found.[2335]

When, however, we come to the imitation Greek vases of the third and
second centuries, we find a curious reversion to the old Greek practice
of inscribing the names of the figures and even sentences on the
paintings themselves. Some of these have already been mentioned. The
best example is afforded by the krater with Admetos and Alkestis, on
which the names of the two principals are given as [??????], _Atmite_,
and [??CS??], _Alcsti_; while by the side of the figure of Charun is a
long inscription 15[46]?G?: 15[72]??SG?: 15[56]??G: 15[94]?????:
14[96]F?????G? On the vase with Ajax and Penthesileia the names are
given as [??F?S], [????], [?????S???], and [??T???] [TYRMYGAS]. On a
vase mentioned by Gerhard, Nike inscribes on a shield the word [??S??],
_Lasna_.[2336]

                     § 2. ETRUSCAN TERRACOTTA WORK

It remains to say a few words on the other uses of clay among the
Etruscans. This subject has indeed been discussed to some extent in
Chapter III., regarding the use of clay in general in classical times.
But there are some features of work in terracotta which are peculiar to
this people. For their extensive use of this material we are quite
prepared by the evidence of the pottery found in their tombs, which
shows that they understood the processes of manufacture perfectly, even
if they failed in their attempts at decoration. As we shall see, they
employed it constantly, not only for finer works of art, but for
ordinary and more utilitarian purposes. This we know not only from the
existing remains, but from many passages of ancient writers, who speak
of the Etruscan preference for clay and their skill in its use.

Pliny, in particular, speaks of the art of modelling in clay as
“brought to perfection in Italy, and especially in Etruria.”[2337] He
attributes its introduction to the three craftsmen whom Demaratos
brought with him from Corinth in the seventh century B.C.—Eucheir,
Eugrammos, and Diopos—whom he styles _fictores_.[2338] This story of
its origin need not, of course, be implicitly believed; nor, on the
other hand, need the statement of Tatian,[2339] who, followed in modern
times by Campana and other Italian writers, claimed for Italy a
priority over Greece in the art of making terracotta figures. For their
statues the Etruscans certainly seem to have preferred clay to any
other material. Although few of these have descended to us, there are
many passages in Roman literature which imply their excellence, and it
is chiefly from these that our knowledge of Etruscan statues in
terracotta is derived. The Romans, unable themselves to execute such
works, were obliged to employ Etruscan artists for the decoration of
their temples, as in the notable instance of that of Jupiter on the
Capitol. A certain Volca of Veii[2340] was employed by Tarquinius
Priscus, about 509 B.C., to make the statue of the god, which was of
colossal proportions, and was painted vermilion, the colour being
solemnly renewed from time to time. The same artist made the famous
chariot on the pediment of the temple, which, instead of contracting in
the furnace, swelled to such an extent that the roof had to be taken
off. This circumstance was held to prognosticate the future greatness
of Rome.[2341] Volca also made a figure of Hercules in the Forum
Boarium, and we read that Numa consecrated a statue of Janus[2342]; but
the material in the latter case is not actually specified as terracotta.

Pliny goes on to say that such statues existed in many places even in
his day. He also speaks of numerous temples in Rome and other towns
with remarkable sculptured pediments and cornices; the existing remains
of some of these will presently be discussed. There is no doubt that
the use of terracotta for the external decoration of temples was even
more general in Etruria than in Greece; and, whereas in Greece it
ceased in the fifth century, in Etruria it lasted down to Roman times.
The use of bricks in Etruria seems to have belonged entirely to the
time when it had lost its independence, under Roman dominion. For
instance, the brick walls of Arretium, which are highly spoken of by
Pliny and Vitruvius,[2343] do not belong to the Etruscan, but to the
later city; and although Gell alleged that he saw tufa walls with a
substructure of tiling at Veii, Dennis sought for these in vain[2344];
even a pier of a bridge resting on tiles which he found there proved to
be later work. For buildings and for tombs the principal material seems
to have been tufa, but the tiles of the roofs were probably of
terracotta, as were sometimes those used for covering tombs.[2345]

Etruscan temples were also largely built of wood, with a covering of
terracotta slabs, as the evidence of recent excavations shows. This
method of decoration, which, as we saw in a previous chapter (Vol. I.
p. 100), was largely practised in Italy and Sicily, and even spread
thence to Greece, as at Olympia, is not alluded to by Vitruvius in his
description of Etruscan temples (iv. 7), although he speaks of the
wooden construction of the roofs; but he alludes to _antepagmenta_
fixed on the front of the temples, which may refer to the terracotta
slabs.[2346] Earlier restorations made after his descriptions are
imperfect in this respect, only regarding construction and not
decorative effect.[2347] It is at any rate clear that the roof had a
pediment on the front only, the other three sides projecting over and
forming eaves, round which hung the pendent slabs (see below); they
were not required in front because of the portico. Araeostyle temples,
the same writer tells us, had wooden architraves and pediments,
ornamented with sculpture in terracotta. The cinerary urns often supply
evidence as to the construction of the roofs, with their exact
imitation of tiles.

We have now remains of at least four temples built in this method, or,
rather, of their terracotta decoration: from Cervetri in Berlin, from
Civita Lavinia in the British Museum (Plates II.-III.), from Alatri
(1882), and from Falerii or Civita Castellana (1886).[2348] Other
remains of architectural terracotta work come from Orvieto,[2349]
Pitigliano,[2350] and Luni (see below), and from Conca or
Satricum,[2351] the latter being chiefly antefixal ornaments of the
ordinary Italian types. The Cervetri remains consist of roof-tiles,
antefixal ornaments with figures in relief in front, and friezes with
chariots and warriors.[2352] Portions of a similar frieze from the same
site are in the British Museum,[2353] as are also three antefixes in
the same style as one in Berlin from Cervetri (Plate LIX.).[2354] They
belong to the fifth century, and illustrate a later development from
the ordinary archaic type—idealised female heads or heads of Satyrs
with rich polychrome decoration. Another example in Berlin appears to
represent Juno Sospita.[2355] The friezes are a good example of the
Italo-Ionic style of the end of the sixth century, the points of
comparison with the Chalcidian and other B.F. vases being particularly
noteworthy.[2356]

But for information on the form of the Etruscan temple these are too
fragmentary to be of any use. The remains from Alatri, Civita
Castellana, and Civita Lavinia are much more illuminating. The
last-named, of which some description has already been given (Vol. I.
p. 101), are partly archaic, partly of the fourth century, the two
former wholly of the later date; but allowing for differences of style,
the general arrangement was in all cases practically the same. The
front of the temple was in the form of a pediment supported on columns,
with ornamental raking cornices, and _akroteria_ in the form of figures
or groups. Along the sides and back ran gutters, with lion-head spouts
at intervals, faced by upright cornices, with pendent plates of
terracotta, or “barge-boards” hanging free and ornamented with patterns
in relief. These were for protection against weather, like the edgings
to the roofs of Swiss châlets and modern railway stations. The practice
was quite un-Greek, and peculiar to Etruria. The antefixal ornaments
were continued along the sides above the cornice. The architraves were
also ornamented with terracotta slabs, on which were palmette patterns;
and thus the whole formed a rich and continuous system of terracotta
plating which completely covered the woodwork of the architraves and
roof. All the slabs were ornamented with coloured patterns in relief,
or simply painted on a white slip, such as maeanders, tongue,
scale-pattern, lotos-flowers, or various forms of the palmette.

                  *       *       *       *       *
         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                               PLATE LIX

[Illustration:

  1. ETRUSCAN ANTEFIX (FIFTH CENT.)
  2. ETRUSCAN SARCOPHAGUS (THIRD CENT.)
  (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

         ------------------------------------------------------

The existing remains of Etruscan monumental sculpture in clay are, as
has been indicated, not large. Some of the architectural antefixes are
almost important enough to be included under this head, especially
those in the form of figures or groups modelled almost in the round.
These belong mostly to the fifth century B.C., and the finest example
is the group in the Berlin Museum from the Cervetri find already
mentioned, representing Eos carrying off Kephalos[2357]; it is in the
style of about 480 B.C. A smaller but still very effective example is
the antefix from Civita Lavinia in the British Museum, representing a
Satyr and Maenad awaiting the advent of Dionysos (Plate II.).[2358]
With these must be reckoned the sculptured friezes from Cervetri in the
British and Berlin Museums, and the reliefs on the British Museum
sarcophagus from the same site.[2359] In all these the same prevalence
of Ionic Greek influence may be observed, which is characteristic of so
much Etruscan work of the late archaic period, both in terracotta and
bronze, as in the reliefs of the Polledrara bust.[2360] This influence,
which is due to the strong Hellenic element in the civilisation of
Caere and the Campanian cities, we have also seen at work in the
vase-paintings of the period.[2361]

One of the earliest instances, and perhaps the most remarkable, of
Etruscan clay modelling in the round, for its size and execution, is
the group on the top of the famous sarcophagus in the British Museum
(Fig. 183).[2362] The figures, a man and woman reclining on a couch,
are life-size, of somewhat slender proportions, with smiling features,
the drapery of the woman stiff and formal. Sir Charles Newton has
described the style as “archaic, the treatment throughout very
naturalistic, in which a curious striving after truth in anatomical
details gives animation to the group, in spite of the extreme
ungainliness of form and ungraceful composition.” The same difficulties
that beset the sculptor of the Polledrara bust, in working in the round
instead of relief, are visible here; and the contrast with the Hellenic
style of the reliefs round the lower part is very marked. There are
similar sarcophagi in the Louvre, and in the Museo Papa Giulio at
Rome.[2363] M. Martha notes in regard to the figures on the former that
the faces are remarkable for individuality and precision of type, but
the limbs are stiff and rude. This is not an infrequent feature of
early Greek art.[2364] Signor Savignoni claims these three monuments as
purely Ionic Greek work, but repudiates much of the British Museum
sarcophagus as un-antique.

[Illustration: FIG. 183. ARCHAIC TERRACOTTA SARCOPHAGUS (BRITISH
MUSEUM).]

Of later sculpture in terracotta the instances are comparatively few,
by far the best being the pedimental sculptures from Luni in Northern
Tuscany, discovered in 1842, and now at Florence.[2365] Their date is
about 200 B.C., and they include figures of the Olympian deities,
Muses, and a group of Apollo and Artemis slaying the Niobides. A few
remains of similar figures were found at Orvieto.[2366]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 184. PAINTED TERRACOTTA SLAB FROM TOMB
  (LOUVRE).
]

It may be convenient to speak here of a small group of monuments in
terracotta which illustrate in an interesting manner the achievements
of Etruscan painting in the archaic period. This is a series of
terracotta slabs, which were inserted into the walls of small tombs at
Cervetri to receive the painted decoration which the Etruscans
considered such an important feature of their sepulchral
arrangements.[2367] Two sets have been found, one of which is in the
Louvre, the other in the British Museum; both are of similar character,
and belong to the beginning of the sixth century, but the style varies
in some degree. Fig. 184 gives one of the slabs in the Louvre.

The surface of the slabs was covered with the usual white slip or
?e???µa of early Greek paintings,[2368] on which the designs were
sketched with a point and filled in with red and black outlines or
washes. The white ground was left for the flesh of women and for white
drapery, the flesh of the men being coloured red. Of the two the Louvre
slabs seem the more advanced, and more directly under Ionic influence,
while the others are more provincial in character. The Caeretan hydriae
seem to have left some traces on the former, and in the latter it is
interesting to note the use of borders of white dots for the drapery,
such as we see on the Daphnae vases (Vol. I. p. 352).

These paintings may also be compared with those in the Grotta Campana
at Veii (Vol. I. p. 39), which, in spirit at any rate, if not in date,
are the oldest examples of Etruscan painting, while still under
Oriental influence. But not being works in terracotta, they do not
strictly concern us here.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Although the more important sarcophagi of the Etruscans were made of
alabaster, tufa, and peperino, a considerable number, principally of
small size, were of terracotta. All of these belong to a late stage of
Etruscan art. Some few were large enough to receive a body laid at full
length. Two large sarcophagi, from a tomb at Vulci, now in the British
Museum, may be taken as typical.[2369] The lower part, which held the
body, is shaped like a rectangular bin or trough, about three feet high
and as many wide. On the covers are recumbent Etruscan women, modelled
at full length. One has both its cover and chest divided into two
portions, probably because it was found that masses of too large a size
failed in the baking. The edges at the point of division are turned up,
like flange tiles. These have on their fronts in one case dolphins, in
the other branches of trees, incised with a tool in outline. Other
sarcophagi of the same dimensions are imitations of the larger ones of
stone. Many of the smaller sort, which held the ashes of the dead, are
of the same shape, the body being a small rectangular chest, while the
cover presents a figure of the deceased in a reclining posture. They
generally have in front a composition in relief, freely modelled in the
later style of Etruscan art, the subject being often of funeral import:
such as the last farewell to the dead; combats of heroes (Plate LIX.),
especially that of Eteokles and Polyneikes; a battle in which an
unarmed hero is fighting with a ploughshare[2370]; the parting of
Admetos and Alkestis in the presence of Death and Charun; and the
slaying of the dragon by Kadmos at the fountain of Ares.[2371] Some few
have a painted roof. All these were painted in _tempera_ upon a white
ground, in bright and vivid tones, producing a gaudy effect. The
inscriptions were also traced in paint, and rarely incised. A good and
elaborate example of the colouring of terracotta occurs in the
recumbent figure on a small sarcophagus in the British Museum (Plate
LIX.).[2372] Here the flesh is red, the eyes black, the hair red, the
wreath green, and the drapery of the figure is white, with purple and
crimson borders; the phiale which the figure holds is yellow (to
imitate gilding), and the cushions on which he reclines are red and
blue. This system of colouring is maintained to an even greater degree
in the relief on the front of the sarcophagus, the subject of which is
a combat of five warriors. The background is coloured indigo, and every
detail is rendered in colour, except the nude parts, which are covered
with a white slip throughout. The pigments employed are red, yellow,
black, green, and purple, and the inscription above is painted in brown
on white, all the colours being marvellously fresh and well preserved;
but the general effect is gaudy, fantastic, and scarcely appropriate.
It may also be said in regard to the whole series that the subjects are
monotonous and unpleasing, and the compositions crowded to excess.

By far the finest example of these terracotta sarcophagi is one found
at Cervetri not many years ago, now in the British Museum (Plate
LX.).[2373] It is known from the inscription in front to be the last
resting-place of a lady named Seianti Thanunia, whose effigy,
life-size, adorns the top—a most realistic specimen of Etruscan
portrait-sculpture, and in splendid preservation. Within the lower part
her skeleton is still preserved, together with a series of silver
utensils. A very similar specimen, that of Larthia Seianti, is in the
Museum at Florence,[2374] and from the coins found therewith the date
of these two may be fixed at about 150 B.C. The figure of the lady was
cast in two halves, the joint being below the hips; she is represented
as a middle-aged matron, her head veiled in a mantle which she draws
aside with her right hand. In her left she holds a mirror in an open
case; she wears a _sphendone_ in her hair, and much jewellery. On the
right arm are bracelets, and on the left hand six rings, the bezels of
which are painted purple to imitate sard-stones; in her ears are
pendants painted to imitate amber set in gold. The nude parts are
painted flesh-colour, and colouring is freely employed throughout, the
cushions being painted in stripes. The dimensions of the sarcophagus
itself are 6 ft. by 2 ft. by 1 ft. 4 in.; it has no reliefs on the
front, but is ornamented with pilasters, triglyphs, and quatrefoils.

For antefixal ornaments, masks, and the decoration of the smaller
sarcophagi and other products of ordinary industry, the clay seems to
have been invariably made in the form of a mould; but for the larger
sarcophagi and the Canopic figures a rough clay model was made by hand
and itself baked. Probably both processes were employed
concurrently—large statues, for instance, being made in several pieces;
in these it will generally be noted that the head and torso are
modelled more carefully than the limbs.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                                PLATE LX

[Illustration: SARCOPHAGUS OF SEIANTI THANUNIA (SECOND CENT. B.C.)
(BRIT. MUS.)]

         ------------------------------------------------------

M. Martha[2375] explains the invariable colouring of Etruscan
terracottas on the supposition that the Etruscans did not profess to
make figures in this material, but looked down on it as a common
substance, to be concealed wherever possible. However this may be, the
polychromy was not only a necessary artifice, but an admirable means of
imparting life and realism to the figures. In the archaic period there
is much less variety, yellow, red, brown, and black being the only
colours employed as a rule.[2376] The dark red pigment usually applied
for flesh-colour on the sarcophagi may suggest the _minium_ with which
the statue of Jupiter Capitolinus was smeared. In later work the tints
are lighter and much more varied, as we have seen, and this is
especially noticeable on the figures from the Luni pediments, in which
rose, yellow, green, and blue are employed with the same delicate
_nuances_ that we see in the Tanagra figures.

                          § 3. SOUTHERN ITALY

In dealing with the indigenous non-Hellenic people of Southern Italy
and their pottery, we are almost more at a disadvantage than in regard
to the Etruscans. The peoples are almost unknown to us, and are vaguely
characterised as “Iapygian,” “Messapian,” “Oscan,” and so on; but this
does not really carry us much further. Moreover, this part of Italy has
never been scientifically or thoroughly excavated, like Etruria, and
even where finds have been made they are small and poor; nothing of
very remote date appears to have come to light, and very few early
Greek importations. Hence there has been until quite recently no
attempt made at a scientific study of the pottery, or even to
distinguish local from imported wares; in Heydemann’s catalogue of the
Naples vases it is practically ignored. Recently, however, Herr Max
Mayer, and Signor Patroni, whose laudable investigations of the
Graeco-Italian vases have already received attention (Chapter XI.),
have turned their attention to the study of the less promising
indigenous fabrics.[2377]

The region with which the present section deals is that comprised by
the three districts of Apulia, Lucania, and Campania. The barbarian
races by which it was occupied in classical times were known by various
names, used with some vagueness; but roughly we may divide them into
two groups: the Iapygians or Messapians and the Peucetians, occupying
the south-east portion of the peninsula from modern Bari to the end of
the “heel”[2378]; and the Osco-Samnites, who occupied Campania and the
mountainous district of Samnium on its north-eastern border. In Lucania
the district of Sala Consilina has yielded local pottery.[2379] The
Osco-Samnites appear to have been more amenable to the influence of
Greek civilisation than the others, owing to the existence in their
midst of such centres of culture as Cumae, Capua, and Poseidonia
(Paestum); hence we find that the pottery of that region shows a much
more Hellenic character than that of Apulia, and is more like that of
Etruria in its attempts to imitate the Greek imported fabrics (see Vol.
I. p. 484).

Greek painted vases are found in Southern Italy as early as the seventh
century B.C., though even in “Aegean” times they had penetrated as far
as Sicily, and even Marseilles (see Vol. I. pp. 69, 86).[2380] At Cumae
in particular, and also at Nola, “Proto-Corinthian” and Corinthian
wares have been found; during the sixth century Ionic and Attic B.F.
wares make their appearance, but never in large quantities, as in
Etruria. They, however, gave rise to a class of imitative fabrics found
chiefly in Campania: small amphorae and other forms rudely painted with
black silhouettes, dating from the fifth century. At Tarentum the finds
of vases have been mainly Greek, but even these are comparatively rare.
The principal examples of local wares are to be seen in the museums of
Bari, Lecce, Taranto, and Naples; the British Museum, Louvre, and
Berlin only possess isolated specimens.[2381] The general scarcity of
imports is due, Signor Patroni thinks, to the restricted intercourse
between the colonies on the coast and the interior districts peopled by
hostile local tribes. After the fifth century, when large numbers of
Greek artists were established in the towns of Southern Italy, the
circumstances became different, and we have already made in Chapter XI.
a general survey of the various fabrics produced from that time in the
various centres down to the total decay of the art.

All Italiote pottery, before this direct influence of Hellenism made
itself felt, may be called “archaic”; but it must at the same time be
borne in mind that these archaic types still went on during the time of
Greek influence. They formed, in fact, a “domestic” style, as opposed
to the “high-art” style of the Graeco-Italian wares, just as the early
Geometrical pottery of Athens is thought to have been in relation to
the Mycenaean vases (see Vol. I. p. 279). They must not, however, be
regarded—as has been done by some writers—as deliberate archaistic
revivals of older fabrics. It is true that they bear a remarkable
resemblance in many cases to Aegean, Cypriote, and Geometrical wares;
but this likeness is due to other causes, being the result of
development, not of direct imitation. A learned Italian, on first
seeing some of the local pottery excavated in Apulia, exclaimed, “This
is the Mycenaean style of Italy.” Chronologically and ethnographically
he was wrong, but artistically he was right; and as Signor Patroni has
pointed out, parallels to nearly all the ornamental motives of local
Apulian fabrics may be traced in Mycenaean pottery.

There is also a favourite shape, that of a large double-mouthed
_askos_, examples of which may be seen in the British Museum (F 508 =
Fig. 185, and F 509), which is obviously derived directly from the
Mycenaean “false-necked amphora” (see Vol. I. p. 271). It is not a
Hellenic type, although it is the forerunner of a form of askos found
among the painted vases of Apulia.[2382] Another favourite form, which
Signor Patroni calls the _orcio appulo_, a jar with three vertical
handles round the nearly spherical body, and wide-spreading mouth, may
similarly be derived from the Mycenaean three-handled _pyxis_ (Vol. I.
p. 272). Other forms, again, are parallel with those of Cyprus, as is
in some cases the system of geometrical decoration, a figure or pattern
in a panel with borders of geometrical ornament.

The writers above-mentioned distinguish two main classes of the local
pottery of Apulia (including the south-eastern extremity or “heel” of
Italy). The central portion of this district was inhabited by a tribe
known as the Peucetii, and the extremity by Messapians, or, as they are
also styled, Iapygians. The vases, which appear to be the product of
the latter race, are found in various places—such as Brindisi, Egnazia
or Fasano, Lecce, Nardo, Ostuni, Otranto, Putignano, Rugge, Taranto,
and Uzento—and they may best be studied in the museum at Bari. The
pottery of the Peucetii, which Signor Patroni calls Apulian, covers the
region round Bari, including Putignano on the south, Bitonto and Ruvo
on the north, where the local civilisation seems to have been modified
by the influence of such centres as Canosa.

[Illustration: FIG. 185. ASKOS OF LOCAL APULIAN FABRIC (BRITISH
MUSEUM).]

The typical form of Messapian pottery is a krater with high angular
handles, at the highest and lowest points of which are pairs of discs
(_rotelle_), a spherical body, and neck sloping inwards, without lip.
The form is one which, as we have seen in Chapter XI., was adopted by
the Greek vase-painters in Lucania at a later date.[2383] Mayer states
that this form is only found in the “heel” of Italy, but Patroni seems
to imply that it is typical of Central Apulia.[2384] It is painted in
two colours—purple-red and dark brown or black; but the former colour
is not found in the earlier examples. The decoration includes simple
geometrical or vegetable patterns, such as wreaths, panels of
lozenge-pattern, zigzags, and an ornament composed of two triangles
point to point [hourglass], which Mayer calls the “hour-glass“
ornament. The more developed examples have figures in panels, ranging
from rows of ducks to human figures. Among these are a man gathering
fruit from a tree and two stags confronted. Lenormant published two
very interesting specimens in the Louvre, one of which has two cocks
confronted, the other a man swimming accompanied by a dolphin.[2385]

The latter, with others of the same class, styled by Lenormant
“Iapygian,” appear to be imitations of B.F. amphorae[2386]; but if they
are imitations they must be almost contemporaneous with their
prototypes, and cannot be later than the fifth century. The man with
the dolphin recalls the story of Taras and the coin-types of Tarentum;
but Lenormant pointed out that a similar legend was current relating to
Iapys, the eponymous hero of Iapygia,[2387] and he may therefore be
intended. Some of these vases have painted inscriptions, one of which
runs, [???]; but they are apparently nothing more than names, partly
Hellenised.

Among other shapes are a kind of askos with simple decoration, a jug or
pitcher with discs attached to the handles, also with simple patterns,
and a unique variety of the krater with four flat-topped
column-handles. Signor Patroni[2388] calls attention to another class
of Messapian vases from which the geometrical decorative element is
absent, the ornament being arranged in bands of equal width, and
varying between linear and natural forms. A characteristic motive is a
sort of chain-pattern. The wave and rows of pomegranate-buds also
occur, and animals, such as dogs and dolphins; also human heads and
figures. The shapes are either the double-necked askos, as given in
Fig. 185, with an arched handle between the mouths, or a kind of double
situla, formed of two jars on a cylindrical stand with a vertical
handle between.

As Mayer has pointed out, there cannot here be any question of a very
ancient class of vases, but rather of one of eclectic character. The
Geometrical tendency appears chiefly in the north of the district,
where the influence of Peucetia (see below) was felt. The vegetable
ornaments, he suggests, have affinities with those of “Rhodian”
vases.[2389] The date can hardly be earlier than the fifth century.

[Illustration:

  From _Notizie degli Scavi_.

  FIG. 186. KRATER OF “PEUCETIAN” FABRIC WITH GEOMETRICAL DECORATION.
]

The fabrics of Central or Peucetian Apulia centre, as has been noted,
round Bari. They are all of a strongly Geometrical type, but the system
of ornamentation is freer and more varied than in the Messapian class.
They are easily recognisable by their forms and characteristic designs,
painted only in brown or black. Here, again, the typical form is a
krater, in which the handles are either arched in vertical fashion or
else form flat bands. It has a shallow, spreading lip. The patterns are
arranged in panels and bands, and are often executed with great care.
Fig. 186 gives an example from Sala Consilina in Lucania.[2390] The
favourite motives are chequers, zigzags, the “hour-glass,” hook-armed
crosses, and lozenges filled with reticulated pattern, neatly arranged
in friezes or saltire-wise. Round the lower part of the vase is often
found what may be described as a comb-pattern, and on some vases is a
curious rudimentary form of the maeander, arranged in triangles or
diagonal crosses. Among the other shapes are a small askos with
ring-handle on the back, a sort of high stand like a fruit-dish, large
cups and bowls, and the _orcio_ already mentioned. One of the finest
examples is a krater from Ruvo in the Jatta collection,[2391] with
twisted handles and a very elaborate system of ornamentation, chiefly
diaper and maeander patterns.

Like the Messapian, the Peucetian or Apulian pottery seems to have
flourished during the fifth century[2392]; but there are some vases
which seem to form connecting-links with their Hellenic prototypes, and
probably belong to the sixth century.[2393] In any case, both fabrics
must be regarded as much earlier than previously supposed; they are
certainly not late archaistic work, and time must be allowed for their
disappearance when the Hellenic fabrics of Apulia begin. In placing the
majority of the products between 600 and 450 B.C., we shall probably
not be far from the truth, although M. Pottier[2394] would throw the
origin of the fabrics as far back as the eighth century.

-----

Footnote 2246:

  See especially Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 285 ff., and Gsell,
  _Fouilles de Vulci_, p. 315 ff.

Footnote 2247:

  i. 94.

Footnote 2248:

  _Sat._ i. 6, 1.

Footnote 2249:

  i. 30.

Footnote 2250:

  _Op. cit._ p. 297.

Footnote 2251:

  _Frag. Hist. Graec._ ed. Didot, i. p. 45: ?p? Sp???t? p?taµ? (the
  name of one of the mouths). He calls them here Pelasgians.

Footnote 2252:

  Bertrand and Reinach, _Les Celtes dans les vallées du Po et du
  Danube_, p. 73 ff.: cf. Bertrand, _Arch. celtique et gauloise_, p.
  205.

Footnote 2253:

  Cf. i. 27 with vii. 3.

Footnote 2254:

  See Helbig, _Die Italiker in der Poebene_, for a full account of this
  period; also Von Duhn in _J.H.S._ xvi. p. 128, whose ethnographical
  views seem to differ in many details from those of other writers
  previously cited.

Footnote 2255:

  See _Brit. Mus. Cat. of Bronzes_, p. xlv.

Footnote 2256:

  See _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1884, p. 111.

Footnote 2257:

  _Notizie degli Scavi_, 1881, pl. 5, Nos. 15, 16.

Footnote 2258:

  _Il._ xi. 633; _Od._ iv. 615, vi. 232. See Dumont-Pottier, i. p. 152.

Footnote 2259:

  On the ornamentation of the Villanuova period general reference may
  be made to Böhlau’s _Zur Ornamentik der Villanovaperiode_ (1895).

Footnote 2260:

  Gsell, _Fouilles de Vulci_, p. 254.

Footnote 2261:

  See _Brit. Mus. Cat. of Bronzes_, p. xlv, and references there given.

Footnote 2262:

  The objects found at Hallstatt date from about the tenth to ninth
  centuries B.C., and are sometimes “sub-Mycenaean” in character.

Footnote 2263:

  See on the subject of hut-urns the bibliographies given in Gsell,
  _Fouilles de Vulci_, p. 258; _Bonner Studien_, p. 24 (Von Duhn); and
  _J.H.S._ xvi. p. 127 (_id._).

Footnote 2264:

  _J.H.S._ xvi. p. 125.

Footnote 2265:

  See also for Narce _Mon. Antichi_, iv. pt. 1, p. 105 ff.

Footnote 2266:

  M. Pottier states that a primitive kind of wheel was used for making
  the _impasto_ in the eighth century, and Helbig and Martha are
  certainly wrong in stating that it was not introduced till the sixth
  (see _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 294).

Footnote 2267:

  _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1885, p. 118.

Footnote 2268:

  _E.g._ _Brit. Mus. Cat._ Nos. 347 ff.

Footnote 2269:

  _Op. cit._ p. 345 ff.

Footnote 2270:

  _Notizie degli Scavi_, 1884, p. 186 = 338: cf. for the style a vase
  from Tamassos, Cyprus, in the British Museum (_Rev. Arch._ ix. 1887,
  p. 77).

Footnote 2271:

  See generally Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 363 ff.

Footnote 2272:

  See Vol. I. p. 153, and cf. Perrot, _Hist. de l’Art_, vi. p. 211,
  fig. 57, for examples from Troy.

Footnote 2273:

  Abeken, _Mittelital._ p. 362 ff.; but see _Arch. Zeit._ 1881, p. 41.

Footnote 2274:

  _E.g._ _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1884, pl. C.

Footnote 2275:

  Hdt. i. 14, 25; Paus. x. 16.

Footnote 2276:

  For Greek examples of early vases with reliefs see Vol. I. p. 497,
  and Plate XLVII.

Footnote 2277:

  See for specimens _Gaz. Arch._ 1881, pls. 28, 29, 32-3; Pottier,
  _Vases du Louvre_, pls. 33-4.

Footnote 2278:

  Louvre D 151.

Footnote 2279:

  _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1884, p. 163.

Footnote 2280:

  _Röm. Mitth._ 1886, p. 135.

Footnote 2281:

  See Pliny, _H.N._ xxxv. 152. The names are doubtless descriptive.

Footnote 2282:

  Cf. _B.M. Cat. of Bronzes_, p. xlvii, and references there given.

Footnote 2283:

  Nearly all the contents of this tomb are now in the British Museum
  (Etruscan Saloon, Cases 126-35): see Micali, _Mon. Ined._ pls. 4-8;
  Dennis, _Etruria_^2, i. p. 457 ff.; C. Smith in _J.H.S._ xiv. p. 206.

Footnote 2284:

  A most trustworthy reproduction of this vase and its decoration, made
  by Mr. F. Anderson, is given in _J.H.S._ xiv. pls. 6-7.

Footnote 2285:

  Cf. throughout the François vase.

Footnote 2286:

  Micali, _op. cit._ pl. 5, fig. 2.

Footnote 2287:

  _Cat._ 1543.

Footnote 2288:

  _Cat._ C 617-18.

Footnote 2289:

  _Bull. dell’ Inst._  1881, p. 167, No. 26.

Footnote 2290:

  The hydria is a form of essentially Ionic origin, the earliest
  examples being found in the “Caeretan” and Daphnae fabrics (see
  Chapter VIII.).

Footnote 2291:

  _Cat. of Terracottas_, B 630 = Fig. 183.

Footnote 2292:

  Micali, _Mon. Ined._ pl. 58; Dennis, _Etruria_, i. p. 34 ff.

Footnote 2293:

  Cf. an oinochoë in the British Museum, A 633; and see _J.H.S._ x. p.
  126.

Footnote 2294:

  _Mus. Greg._ i. pl. 15 ff.; Helbig, _Führer_, 1899, ii. p. 344 ff.

Footnote 2295:

  _Notizie degli Scavi_, 1887, pls. 14-18.

Footnote 2296:

  _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1876, p. 117 ff., and _Mon. dell’ Inst._ x. pls.
  31-33. The art of Praeneste, though a Latin town, was wholly
  Etruscan. Cf. the later series of bronze cistae found here.

Footnote 2297:

  Martha, _L’Art Étrusque_, p. 462.

Footnote 2298:

  _Louvre Cat._ ii. pp. 294, 315.

Footnote 2299:

  _Traité_, i. p. 414: see Blümner, _Technologie_, ii. p. 62. It may be
  compared with the analysis of the clay of Greek vases given in Vol.
  I. p. 203.

Footnote 2300:

  Cf. Micali, _Mon. Ined._ pls. 28-30.

Footnote 2301:

  Micali, _op. cit._ pls. 28-32.

Footnote 2302:

  Cf. _Arch. Zeit._ 1884, pl. 8, fig. 1, and the reliefs from Sparta,
  _Ath. Mitth._ 1877, pls. 20-4.

Footnote 2303:

  Cf. _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1877, pls. U, V; Micali, _op. cit._ pls. 27-32.

Footnote 2304:

  See Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 324 ff.

Footnote 2305:

  Cf. B.M. A 379 with _Bronze Cat._ Nos. 385, 436-37.

Footnote 2306:

  See also on the subject generally, _Gaz. Arch._ 1879, p. 99 ff.;
  Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 314 ff.; Martha, _L’Art Étrusque_, p.
  462 ff.; and Gsell, _Fouilles de Vulci_, p. 445 ff.

Footnote 2307:

  vi. 343: cf. Pliny, _H.N._ xxxv. 158-59, and Chapter XXI.

Footnote 2308:

  ii. 60.

Footnote 2309:

  xiv. 98: cf. p. 479.

Footnote 2310:

  See Perrot, _Hist. de l’Art_, i. p. 308.

Footnote 2311:

  See _Cat. of Bronzes_, No. 600, and _Cat. of Terracottas_, D 215. The
  bronze plates were formerly made up into the shape of a shield, with
  many restorations; but on removing these, the true form was
  discovered. The body of the chair is modern.

Footnote 2312:

  _Mus. di Ant. Class._ i. p. 299 ff., with many examples on pls. 9,
  9_a_, 11-13. Fig. 181 is from pl. 9, figs. 9, 9_a_.

Footnote 2313:

  H 148 in the British Museum is a curious terracotta example, covered
  with incised designs: see Benndorf, _Gesichtshelme und
  Sepuleralmasken_, pl. 11, p. 42.

Footnote 2314:

  _Cat._ 3976-77.

Footnote 2315:

  _Cat. of Terracottas_, D 219-220.

Footnote 2316:

  See Vol. I. p. 321.

Footnote 2317:

  _Röm. Mitth._ 1888, p. 174 ff.: see also Endt, _Ion. Vasenm._ p. 71.

Footnote 2318:

  They also show the influence of the “Pontic” class (Vol. I. p. 359).

Footnote 2319:

  It may be compared with B 59 in the same case (Plate XXVI.).

Footnote 2320:

  See Endt, _Ion. Vasenm._ p. 51; Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 413.

Footnote 2321:

  B.M. B 61-74; Louvre E 754-81 (some of these do not show distinctive
  Etruscan features, although made in Italy); Naples 2522, 2717, 2757;
  Würzburg 81-2; Micali, _Mon. Ined._ 36. 1, 37, 1, and 43, 3; _id._
  _Storia_, 82, 3; Dubois-Maisonneuve, _Introd._ 34; Inghirami, _Mus.
  Chins._ 72; Gsell, _Fouilles de Vulci_, pl. 18-9; _Anzeiger_, 1893,
  p. 87. According to Endt, _loc. cit._, about 200 examples are known.
  B 63 in the B.M. is reproduced in Plate LVIII.

Footnote 2322:

  Another is given in _Mon. dell’ Inst._ x. pl. 51.

Footnote 2323:

  Bibl. Nat. 918 = Dennis, _Etruria_, ii. frontispiece.

Footnote 2324:

  Reinach, i. p. 88.

Footnote 2325:

  Micali, _Mon. Ined._ pl. 38.

Footnote 2326:

  Cf. _Mon. dell’ Inst._ xi. pls. 4-5; also Inghirami, _Vasi Fitt._ iv.
  358.

Footnote 2327:

  Roberts, _Gk. Epigraphy_, i. p. 16 (_q.v._ for facsimile); _Bull.
  dell’ Inst._ 1882, p. 91.

Footnote 2328:

  Roberts, p. 17: for a facsimile see Dennis, i. p. 271.

Footnote 2329:

  Roberts, p. 18.

Footnote 2330:

  Dennis, i. p. 273; Deecke, _Etr. Forsch. u. Stud._ iv. (1883) p. 39.

Footnote 2331:

  Dennis, i. p. 172.

Footnote 2332:

  _Ibid._ ii. p. 224.

Footnote 2333:

  See for instances Micali, _Mon. Ined._ pl. 55, 7; _ibid._ _Storia_,
  pl. 101; _Mus. Greg._ ii. pl. 99.

Footnote 2334:

  Reinach, i. 203.

Footnote 2335:

  _E.g._ Fabretti, _C. I. Ital._ 2606, 2609.

Footnote 2336:

  _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1831, p. 176: cf. also Fabretti, Nos. 2222, 2583.

Footnote 2337:

  _H.N._ xxxv. 157.

Footnote 2338:

  _Ibid._ 152.

Footnote 2339:

  _Orat. ad Graec._ 1.

Footnote 2340:

  Pliny, _H.N._ xxxv. 157.

Footnote 2341:

  The story is told by Pliny, _H.N._ xxviii. 16, and Plutarch,
  _Poplicola_, 13. See Vol. I. p. 116.

Footnote 2342:

  Pliny, _H.N._ xxxiv. 33.

Footnote 2343:

  _H.N._ xxxv. 173; Vitr. ii. 8, 9.

Footnote 2344:

  _Etruria_, i. p. 12.

Footnote 2345:

  See Durm, _Handbuch d. Architektur_, 2. Theil, Bd. 2 (_Die Baukunst
  der Etrusker_), p. 5.

Footnote 2346:

  See Wiegand, _Puteolanische Bauinschr._ (_Jährb. für Philol._
  Suppl.-Bd. 20, p. 756 ff.); Borrmann in Durm’s _Handbuch_, 1. Theil,
  Bd. 4, p. 40.

Footnote 2347:

  For a recent restoration of an Etruscan temple see Anderson and
  Spiers, _Architecture of Greece and Rome_, p. 126.

Footnote 2348:

  _Notizie degli Scavi_, 1887, p. 92 ff.

Footnote 2349:

  _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1881, p. 48.

Footnote 2350:

  _Notizie_, 1898, p. 429 ff.; _Class. Review_, 1899, p. 329.

Footnote 2351:

  _Notizie_, 1896, p. 33.

Footnote 2352:

  _Mon. dell’ Inst._ Suppl. pls. 1-3.

Footnote 2353:

  _Cat. of Terracottas_, B 626.

Footnote 2354:

  _Cat. of Terracottas_, B 621-23: cf. _Arch. Zeit._ 1871, pl. 1. B 621
  is illustrated in Plate LIX.

Footnote 2355:

  Panofka, _Terracotten des k. Mus._ pl. 10.

Footnote 2356:

  See Furtwaengler, _Meisterwerke_, p. 250.

Footnote 2357:

  _Arch. Zeit._ 1882, pl. 15: cf. also Martha, _L’Art Étrusque_, p. 324
  (in Louvre).

Footnote 2358:

  _J.H.S._ xiii. p. 316.

Footnote 2359:

  Murray, _Terracotta Sarcophagi_, pls. 9-11.

Footnote 2360:

  _B.M. Cat. of Bronzes_, No. 434, and p. xlvii.

Footnote 2361:

  See p. 308, and Furtwaengler, _Meisterwerke_, p. 250.

Footnote 2362:

  For full description of this sarcophagus see _Cat. of Terracottas_, B
  630; Murray, _Terracotta Sarcophagi_, pls. 9-11, p. 21. It is
  interesting to note that the figures must be contemporaneous with the
  Capitoline statues made by Volca.

Footnote 2363:

  _Mon. dell’ Inst._ vi. pl. 59; _Mon. Antichi_, viii. pl. 13, p. 521
  ff. (Savignoni). The latter was found in the same group of tombs as
  the painted slabs in the Louvre described below.

Footnote 2364:

  Cf. _Mon. Antichi_, viii. p. 531.

Footnote 2365:

  _Mus. Ital. di Ant. Class._ i. p. 89 ff., pls. 3-7.

Footnote 2366:

  Dennis, _Etruria_, ii. p. 48.

Footnote 2367:

  Martha, _L’Art Étrusque_, pl. 4 = _Mon. dell’ Inst._ vi.-vii. pl. 30;
  _J.H.S._ x. pl. 7, p. 243 ff.; Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 412.

Footnote 2368:

  Cf. the Thermon metopes, $1$2 1903, pls. 2-6 (Vol. I. p. 92).

Footnote 2369:

  _Cat. of Terracottas_, D 799, 800.

Footnote 2370:

  This subject has been interpreted as Kadmos (or Jason), contending
  with the armed men who sprang from the sown teeth of the dragon: see
  Dennis, _Etruria_^2, ii. p. 165.

Footnote 2371:

  See generally Brunn and Körte, _I rilievi dell’ urne Etruschi_, 2
  vols.; _B.M. Cat. of Terracottas_, D 787-98.

Footnote 2372:

  _Cat. of Terracottas_, D 795.

Footnote 2373:

  Martha, _L’Art Étrusque_, p. 351; _Ant. Denkm._ i. pl. 20; _Cat. of
  Terracottas_, D 786.

Footnote 2374:

  _Mon. dell’ Inst._ xi. pl. 1.

Footnote 2375:

  _L’Art Étrusque_, p. 300.

Footnote 2376:

  Blue occurs on the B.M. sarcophagus (B 630) (as also on the
  Polledrara hydria).

Footnote 2377:

  _Röm. Mitth._ 1897, p. 201 ff., 1899, p. 13 ff.; Patroni, _Ceramica
  Antica_, chap. i., and _id._ in _Mon. Antichi_, vi. p. 349 ff.: see
  also Pottier, _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 371.

Footnote 2378:

  A line drawn across from Taranto to Fasano roughly divides the two
  districts, the Peucetians being on the north, the Messapians on the
  south.

Footnote 2379:

  _Notizie degli Scavi_, 1897, p. 167.

Footnote 2380:

  For Marseilles see also Déchelette, _Vases Céramiques de la Gaule
  rom._ i. p. 7.

Footnote 2381:

  See also Reinach, ii. 242-43, for those in the Imperial Museum at
  Vienna.

Footnote 2382:

  _E.g._ B.M. F 414-16, 584-85.

Footnote 2383:

  See also Vol. I. p. 172, Fig. 40.

Footnote 2384:

  _Ceram. Ant._ p. 27.

Footnote 2385:

  _Gaz. Arch._ 1881-82, pl. 19, p. 107.

Footnote 2386:

  _Ibid._ pls. 19, 21; _Sale Cat. Hôtel Drouot_, May 11, 1903, No. 20.

Footnote 2387:

  Serv. _ad_ Virg. _Aen._ iii. 332.

Footnote 2388:

  _Ceramica Antica_, p. 19 ff.

Footnote 2389:

  Cf. _Röm. Mitth._ 1897, pl. 10, p. 222.

Footnote 2390:

  _Notizie degli Scavi_, 1897. p. 168.

Footnote 2391:

  _Röm. Mitth._ 1899, pl. 3, fig. 32.

Footnote 2392:

  Patroni puts the limits of date for both fabrics at 600-450 B.C.

Footnote 2393:

  _Röm. Mitth._ 1899, p. 46, pls. 4-5.

Footnote 2394:

  _Louvre Cat._ ii. p. 372.




                              CHAPTER XIX
            _TERRACOTTA IN ROMAN ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE_

    Clay in Roman architecture—Use of bricks—Methods of
      construction—Tiles—Ornamental antefixae—Flue-tiles—Other
      uses—Inscriptions on bricks and tiles—Military tiles—Mural
      reliefs—List of subjects—Roman sculpture in
      terracotta—Statuettes—Uses at Rome—Types and subjects—Gaulish
      terracottas—Potters and centres of fabric—Subjects—Miscellaneous
      uses of terracotta—Money-boxes—Coin-moulds.


The uses of clay among the Romans were, as may be supposed, much the
same as among the Greeks and Etruscans, in architecture, in sculpture,
and for household implements. The main differences are that in some
cases—as in architecture—its use was more extensive at Rome, in others
less; and that generally the products of this material in Roman
workshops are inferior to those of the Greeks. But the technical
processes are in the main identical with those employed by the Greeks,
and consequently much that has been said in Chap. III. of this work
need not be here repeated.

                            I. ARCHITECTURE

                          1. BRICKS AND TILES

The Romans divided the manufacture of objects in clay into two classes:
_opus figlinum_ or fine ware, made from _argilla_ or _creta figularis_;
and _opus doliare_, for tiles and common earthenware.[2395] We begin,
then, as in the chapter on the Greek uses of clay, with the latter
division, including the use of this material in Roman architecture, and
primarily in the making of =bricks and tiles=. It must be borne in
mind, however, that the structural use of bricks of clay, such as we
employ at the present day, was unknown to the Romans; they only used
what we should call tiles, and even these were only employed
structurally, as a facing to walls and vaults of concrete; no walls
were ever built of solid brick, and even in those of seven inches
thickness the bricks are built on a core of concrete. Nor were the
bricks allowed to appear on the outer face of the building, at least
before the second century of the Empire; they were always faced with a
coating of marble or stucco.

Nevertheless, the general use of bricks or tiles was most extensive,
and they were employed as tiles for roofing houses, as bricks for walls
and vaults, and even for columns, as slabs for pavements, for furnaces
and for covering graves, and in tube form for conveying water or hot
air; they are found in temples, theatres, and baths, and are used for
cisterns and fountains, and in aqueducts and military fortifications.
They were called _lateres_, because, says Isidorus, “they were broad,
and made by placing round them four boards.”[2396] The kilns were
called _laterariae_, and the makers _laterarii_; to make bricks was
_lateres ducere_, _fingere_,[2397] or (with reference to the baking
only) _coquere_. The word _later_ seems to be employed indiscriminately
for sun-dried (_crudi_) and baked bricks (_coctiles_),[2398] without
the qualifying epithet, but _testa_ is also used when burnt brick is
intended.[2399] The sun-dried bricks were the earlier and simpler form,
used for building walls and cemented together with clay or mud.[2400]
Vitruvius in his account of brick-making (ii. 3) only refers to this
kind, and apparently never mentions baked bricks except in passing
allusions. He describes three kinds, to which he says the Greeks gave
the respective names of _genus Lydium_, _pentadoron_, and _tetradoron_
(see Vol. I. p. 95). The two latter are exclusively Greek, but the
first-named, 1½ by 1 foot in dimensions, answers to the Roman _tegula
sesquipedalis_.[2401] A frequent arrangement, he says, was to employ
half-bricks in alternate courses with the ordinary sizes, which served
to bind the walls together and present an effective as well as a stable
appearance. This information is repeated by Pliny, copying almost word
for word.[2402]

Among the Romans two dimensions were in general use, as may be inferred
from the frequent mention in inscriptions or elsewhere of the
_sesquipedales_ and of _bipedales_,[2403] or two-foot bricks, as we
shall have occasion to show later. Being very flat and thin in
proportion to their size, these bricks rather resemble tiles, as has
been already noted; they are generally square, or at least rectangular.
But there were also _tegulae bessales_ or bricks measuring two-thirds
of a foot square, _i.e._ about 8 inches, and triangular bricks,
equilateral in form, with a length varying from 4 to 14 inches. The
latter are the kind used in all existing Roman walls of concrete with
brick facings. The thickness varies from 1¼ to 2 inches. They are not
always made with mechanical accuracy, the edges being rounded and the
sides not always parallel. In military works they were often used
alternately with flint and stone (see below, p. 337), as we see them in
England, at Colchester, Dover, Verulam, and many other places.[2404] At
Verulam the tiles are arranged in three horizontal layers at intervals
of about 4 feet, with flint and mortar between. They were also used for
turning the arches of doorways, and for this purpose _tegulae
bipedales_ were cut into pieces, so as only to tail a few inches into
the concrete which they cover. Complete squares were introduced at
intervals to improve the bonding.[2405]

The pillars of the floors of hypocausts were formed of _tegulae
bessales_, and sometimes also of two semicircular bricks joined so as
to form a circle, varying from 6 to 15 inches in diameter.[2406]
Occasionally the upper bricks diminished in size, in order to give
greater solidity to the structure. The bricks or tiles forming the
upper floors were from 18 to 20 inches square; in some cases, as at
Cirencester,[2407] these were flanged tiles (see below).

The general size of Roman bricks was, in the case of the
_sesquipedales_, 1½ by 1 Roman foot; but variations are found, such as
15 by 14 inches. For the _bipedales_ Palladius recommends 2 feet by 1
foot by 4 inches. The great building at Trier known as the Palace of
Constantine is built of burnt bricks, 15 inches square by 1¼ inch
thick.[2408] Prof. Middleton notes tiles in Rome of 12, 14, and 18
inches square,[2409] and Marquardt[2410] states that bricks found in
France measure 15 by 8 to 10 inches; others (the _bessales_) 8 by 8 by
3 inches. A complete circular brick, measuring 7½ inches across by 3¼
inches thick, and impressed with the stamp of the eleventh legion, was
found at Dolae near Gardun, and is now in the museum at Spalato.[2411]

Vitruvius[2412] gives elaborate instructions about the preparation of
the clay for sun-dried bricks, and counsels in the first place a
careful choice of earth, avoiding that which was sandy or stony or full
of loose flints, which made the bricks too heavy, and so liable to
split and fall out when affected by rain; it also prevented the straw
from binding properly. Clay which was either whitish or decidedly red
(from a prevalence of ochre) was preferred, and that combined with
coarse sand (_sabulo masculus_) made light tiles, easily set. The
process of manufacture was a very simple one. The clay was first
carefully cleaned of foreign bodies, and then moistened with water and
kneaded with straw. It was then moulded by hand or in a mould or frame
of four boards, and perhaps also pressed with the foot.[2413] The
bricks were then dried in the sun and turned as required, the usual
process also adopted in the modern brickfield. Some bricks actually
bear the marks of the feet of animals and birds which had passed over
them while the clay was soft, and there is one in the Shrewsbury Museum
with the imprint of a goat’s feet. Others at York and Wiesbaden show
the nails of a boy’s shoes.[2414] These impressions of feet (where
human) may also be referred to the practice of using the feet to knead
the bricks.

The bricks were then ready for use, but were kept for two years before
being employed, otherwise they were liable to contract, which caused
the stucco to break off and the walls to collapse. At Utica, Vitruvius
tells us, they had to be kept five years, and then could only be used
if passed by a magistrate. Altogether, much care was taken in their
preparation, and it was generally considered that spring and autumn
were the most favourable times for making them, probably because they
dried more slowly and were less liable to crack during the operation.
In summer the hot sun baked the outer surface too fast, and this
appeared dry while the interior was still moist, so that when the
inside dried the outside contracted and split.[2415] It was also, of
course, advisable to avoid seasons of rain and frost. But the bricks
could not be properly tested until they had undergone some exposure to
the weather, and for this reason Vitruvius recommends the employment of
old roof-tiles where possible in building walls.[2416]

For baked bricks the processes must have been much the same, with, of
course, the addition of the baking in the furnace. Existing Roman
bricks are nearly always of well-tempered clay and well baked; but the
clay exhibits a great variety of colour—red, yellow, and brown. The
paste is remarkably hard, breaking with an almost vitreous fracture,
and sometimes shows fragments of red brick (_pozzolana_) ground up with
it to bind it together, and prevent warping. This may be seen in the
Flavian Palace on the Palatine, and in an archway in the Aurelian Wall
near the Porta Latina. As an instance of varieties of brick found in
the same building, Nero’s Aurea Domus may be cited.[2417] The
durability of Roman tiles is ascribed to their careful preparation and
seasoning, which give them a much longer life than modern tiles; hence
they were frequently used up again in early mediaeval buildings and in
Romanesque churches in England, as at St. Albans, St. Mary-in-Castro,
Dover, and St. Botolph’s and Holy Trinity, Colchester.[2418]

During the period of the Republic private houses and public buildings
alike were built of unburnt brick in Rome, as we learn from the words
of Dio Cassius,[2419] Varro,[2420] and Cicero[2421]; Varro speaks of
_domus latericiae_, and Cicero of “the brick (_latere_) and concrete of
which the city is constructed.” After the Republican period this
material was still employed outside Rome with burnt-brick
cornices,[2422] but even this was exceptional. Pliny mentions walls of
sun-dried bricks at Arretium and Mevania.[2423] Henceforth, then, burnt
brick was employed more and more as Rome grew more populous.[2424] In
Vitruvius’ time (the beginning of our era) the materials used for
building were stone for substructures, burnt brick (_structura
testacea_) for the outer walls, concrete for the party-walls, and wood
for the roofs and floors. He explains the cessation of the use of
unburnt brick as due to the legal regulations of his time, which
prohibited party-walls of more than 1½ foot in thickness, and unburnt
bricks could only support one story above them in that size.[2425]

Baths, either public or private, walls and military fortifications,
were built of bricks, the latter being thus better able to resist
attacks than if they were of stone. Temples, palaces, amphitheatres,
the magnificent aqueducts and the cisterns with which they
communicated, were also usually of this material. Of these, numerous
remains exist in Rome and other places, such as Cumae and Pozzuoli. The
aqueduct made by Nero from the Anio to Mons Caelius is of brick, that
of Trajan partly so; the _aqua Alexandrina_ of Severus Alexander (A.D.
229) and that existing at Metz are wholly of brick, and so are the
_castella_ or reservoirs made by Agrippa when he constructed the Julian
conduit over the Marcian and Tepulan.[2426] It is true that Augustus
boasted that he had found Rome of brick and left it marble[2427]; but
it must be remembered, firstly, that Suetonius uses the term
_latericiam_, which may denote unburnt brick; secondly, that the phrase
is probably to be limited to public buildings and monuments, in which
there was an increased use of marble for pillars and roofs. For walls
brick and concrete continued to be used, as in private buildings, with
a covering of stucco in place of marble incrustation.

In the first century of the Empire brick-making was brought to
perfection, and its use became universal for private and public
buildings alike; the mortar of the period is also of remarkable
excellence. The Romans introduced brick-making wherever they went; and
even their legions when on foreign service used it for military
purposes. But of pure brick architecture, as we see it, for instance,
in the Byzantine churches of Northern Italy, there was no question
until comparatively late times. It was always covered over with marble
or stucco until the second century of the Empire. Examples of
sepulchral buildings wholly in brick, of the time of Hadrian, may be
seen in the tomb before the Porta San Sebastiano at Rome, known as the
temple of Deus Rediculus. This has Corinthian pilasters with a rich
entablature, red bricks being used for architectural members, yellow
for the walls; the capitals are formed of layers of bricks. Of
Hadrian’s time are also the guard-house of the seventh cohort of
Vigiles across the Tiber, of which a small part remains, and the
_amphitheatrum castrense_ on the walls of Aurelian.[2428]

One of the most remarkable instances of Roman brick construction is the
Pile Cinq-Mars, as it is called, a tower still standing on the right
bank of the Loire, near Tours. It is about 95 feet high and 13 feet
square, expanding at the base, being built of tiles to a depth of 3
feet each side, with a body of concrete; the tiles are set in mortar
composed of chalk, sand, and pounded tiles. On one side there are
eleven rectangular panels with tile-work of various patterns, like
those on the flue-tiles (see p. 348), and as also seen on the Roman
wall at Cologne; the patterns include squares, triangles, and rosettes.
The history and purpose of this building are quite unknown.[2429]

At Pompeii bricks are used only for corners of buildings or doorposts,
and sometimes for columns, as in the Basilica and the house of the
Labyrinth.[2430] There are also late examples of brick columns with
capitals in tiers of bricks as in the tomb mentioned above. Brick walls
are not found, but bricks occur as facing for rubble-work. These are
less than an inch thick, triangular in form, with the hypotenuse (about
6 inches long) showing in the face of the wall. Sometimes fragments of
roof-tiles are used (cf. p. 334). The earlier bricks contain sea-sand,
and have a granular surface; the later are smooth and even in
appearance. Later, what is known as _opus mixtum_ (see below) is used,
as in the entrance of the Herculaneum gate; this implies courses of
stone and brick alternating,[2431] which, as we have seen, was common
in military works, as in the Roman walls in Britain. In this country,
owing to the absence of good material for concrete, the use of stones
or brick throughout for building was general from the first; hence,
too, the bricks are always flat and rectangular in form
(_bipedales_).[2432]

The arrangement of triangular bricks (made by dividing a medium-sized
brick into four before baking), laid flat in regular horizontal
courses, is characteristic of the earliest examples of Roman methods.
It is found in the Rostra (44 B.C.) and in the Regia (35 B.C.), the
earliest existing examples.[2433] The back wall of the Rostra is of
concrete faced with triangular bricks 1½ inch thick, the sides 10
inches long. The same arrangement may be seen in the Pantheon, in the
Thermae of Diocletian, and in some of the aqueducts (see below). The
brickwork in the Pantheon was formerly thought to belong to the
building of Agrippa in 27 B.C., but has been now shown to belong to the
second century.[2434] At Ostia, in the temple of Honos and Virtus, the
walls are built of triangular bricks or with red and yellow bricks with
moulded cornices.

[Illustration:

  Section of Angle.

  FIG. 187. CONCRETE WALL,
  Faced with (A) _opus incertum_, (B) _opus reticulatum_. C shows the
    horizontal section, similar in both.
]

[Illustration: FIG. 188. CONCRETE WALL (VERTICAL SECTION), FACED WITH
BRICK.]

About the year 80 B.C. the method known as _opus reticulatum_ was
introduced, in which the bricks presented square faces (about 4 inches
each way), and were arranged diagonally to form a network pattern (Fig.
187). At Pompeii the _opus reticulatum_ dates from the time of
Augustus; it is laid on concrete, and the bricks are small four-sided
pyramids with bases 3 to 4 inches square.[2435] This method lasted down
to about A.D. 130 in Italy. It should, however, be noted that it was
commoner in stone than in brick, the latter material not having come
into general use for building at the time when it was employed.[2436]
But even when tufa was used for the reticulated work, bricks or tiles
were used for quoins at the angles, and for bonding courses through the
walls, as well as for arches and vaults (Fig. 188). This combination of
_opus reticulatum_ and brickwork is well illustrated in the palace of
Caligula.[2437] In the case of vaults, indeed, the use of brick seems
to have been general, as in the baths of Caracalla, and many other
buildings (cf. Fig. 189). Vitruvius[2438] advises the use of _tegulae
bipedales_ to protect the wooden joists over the vaults from being
rotted by the steam from the hot bathrooms; they were to be placed over
the whole under-surface of the concrete vault, supported on iron
girders, which were suspended from the concrete by iron clamps or pins.
Over the whole was laid a coating of cement (_opus tectorium_) in which
pounded pottery was the chief constituent, and this was stuccoed.[2439]

[Illustration: FIG. 189. CONCRETE ARCH; HALF WITH BRICK FACING REMOVED.]

The _opus mixtum_ (the term is not classical) prevailed regularly under
the later Empire, from the fourth to the sixth century; the earliest
example which can be dated is the circus of Maxentius. It is also used
in work of the time of Theodoric.[2440] The method of construction is
shown in Fig. 190.

The reason for the limited use of brick in Rome may have been the
scarcity of wood for fuel for the kilns. But in any case the pointed
backs of the bricks made a good bonding with concrete, and presented a
large surface with a comparatively small amount of clay. The secret of
the wonderful durability of Roman buildings is that each wall was one
solid coherent mass, owing to the excellence of the concrete. In the
Pantheon the concrete of the dome is nearly 20 feet thick, the brick
facing only about 5 inches. The character of the brick facing often
indicates the date of a wall, the bricks in early work being thick and
the joints thin; later, the reverse is the case. But caution must be
exercised in dating on this principle, owing to the great variety of
methods employed during the same reign, and even in the same
building.[2441]

[Illustration:

  From _Blümner_.
  FIG. 190. DIAGRAM SHOWING CONSTRUCTION OF WALL OF OPUS MIXTUM.
]

                  *       *       *       *       *

The word for a tile, _tegula_, is derived from _tegere_, to cover, or,
as Isidorus says, they are so called _quod aedes tegant_[2442]; the
curved roof-tiles were known as _imbrices_ because they received
rain-showers (_imbres_). The maker of roof-tiles was known as
_tegularius_[2443] or _figulus ab imbricibus_.[2444] _Tegulae_ or flat
roof-tiles were usually made with vertical flanges (2½ inches high)
down the sides, and these flanges, which fitted into one another
longitudinally, when placed side by side served to hold the
covering-tiles placed over them. There were also roof-tiles known as
_tegulae deliciares_[2445] and _colliciares_, which formed the
arrangement underneath the surface of the roof by means of which the
water was collected from the _tegulae_ and carried off in the front
through spouts in the form of lions’ heads.[2446]

Besides the various rectangular forms we find triangular tiles used,
either equilateral or right-angled; semicircular or curved tiles, used
for circular walls, ovens, tombs, and cornices, or other parts of
buildings; cylindrical tiles (_tubuli fictiles_),[2447] which were used
for drains and conduits; and, finally, the rectangular hollow
flue-tiles, employed for hot air in hypocausts.[2448] Another form was
the _tegula mammata_, a plain square tile with four knobs or
breast-like projections (_mammae_), which was often used in party-walls
with the object of keeping out damp.[2449] The tiles were inserted by
the points of the projections into the concrete, thus leaving a space
between in which the warm air could circulate freely.

Existing examples of tiles are composed of a compact dense clay, less
fine than that of the bricks, and of a pale salmon or light straw
colour when baked. They were probably made in moulds—but these may only
have been a couple of boards placed together—and after being dried in
the sun were baked in kilns. The flanged tiles were, of course,
produced by turning up the edges before drying. Besides the arrangement
described above, it is probable that roofs were sometimes tiled in the
manner prevalent in the present day, with flat or curved tiles
overlapping like scales; and for this purpose the tiles seem to have
been pierced with holes at one corner, and so attached to one another.
The same method obtained in the Roman villas in Britain, except that
Stonesfield slate was used in place of tiles. An inscription found at
Niederbrunnen in Germany speaks of _attegia tegulicia_, or huts roofed
with tiles, erected in honour of Mercury.[2450]

Tiles with turned-up edges or flanged tiles were principally employed,
as has been indicated, for roofing; but some were also placed in walls
where required, especially where a space was required for the passage
of air.[2451] They were also employed for the floors of bath-rooms, in
which case they were laid on the _pilae_ of the hypocaust in an
inverted position, and the cement flooring was laid upon them. The
flanges are generally about 2¼ inches higher than the lower surface of
the tile; they are bevelled on the inner side in order to diminish the
diameter of the _imbrex_, but have no holes for nailing to the rafters.
The ends of the sides were cut away in order that the lower edge of one
tile might rest on the upper edge of the one adjoining. Those found in
France are said to be distinguished by the sand and stones found in
their composition.[2452] There are flange tiles of red and yellow clay
from the Roman Thermae at Saintes in the Museum of Sèvres, and others
from ancient potteries at Milhac de Nontron, as well as tiles of red
clay from Palmyra.[2453] In the military _castra_ in England flange
tiles of a red or yellow colour have been found, the latter with
fragments of red tiles mixed in the clay. They are also often found in
the ruins of villas. A flange tile from Boxmoor, Herts, now in the
British Museum, measures 15½ by 12 inches, the flange being 2¼ inches
high; and it will be seen that these dimensions correspond roughly with
the _tegulae bipedales_. Flanged tiles with holes in them appear to
have been used at Pompeii for lighting passages, the flanges serving to
keep out rain.[2454]

The _imbrices_ or covering-tiles which held the flat tiles together,
thus rendering the roof compact, were quite plain, with the exception
of the end ones over the gutters. These were in the form of antefixal
ornaments like the Greek examples (Vol. I. p. 98), an upright semi-oval
termination ornamented with a relief or painted pattern, with an arched
support at the back. Many examples exist at Pompeii (see below),
Ostia,[2455] and elsewhere; but artistically they are far inferior to
the Greek examples, and of simpler design. Most of them have a simple
palmette or acanthus pattern in low relief, but on or below this an
ideal head or the head of a deity is sometimes added, such as Zeus
Ammon, Medusa, a Bacchic head, or a mask, or even a figure of Victory.
Of the last-named there is a good specimen in the British Museum (D 690
= Fig. 191); she carries a trophy from the battle of Actium, and stands
on a globe from which spring two Capricorns (the symbol of
Augustus).[2456]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 191. ROMAN TERRACOTTA ANTEFIX: VICTORY WITH TROPHY
  (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

No better example of the various uses of ornamental tiles in
architecture can be selected than the remains found at Pompeii, which
are exceedingly numerous. Terracotta seems to have been used here
especially for such parts of the decoration as were exposed to wet, as
well-mouths, gutters, and antefixal tiles.[2457] A characteristic
feature of the decoration of Pompeian houses was the trough-like gutter
which surrounded and formed an ornamental cornice to the _compluvium_
or open skylight of the atrium and peristyle, through and from which
the rain-water was collected in the _impluvium_ or tank sunk in the
ground below. These were adorned with spouts in the form of animals’
heads or foreparts,[2458] usually lions and dogs, with borders of
palmettes between; the gutter behind was virtually a long tank of
square section.

Antefixes and gutter-cornices, where they occur, must always be
regarded as serving ornamental rather than necessary purposes. All
early work in terracotta at Pompeii is of coarse clay, but good
execution; later, the reverse is the case. The only public building in
which many remains of terracotta tiles and cornices have been preserved
is the temple of Isis; but the Basilica may also have had terracotta
decoration. Many fragments also remain from private houses, some
actually _in situ_, having been neglected by early explorers as
unimportant. In the house of Sallust a kymation cornice from one of the
garden courts has scenic masks forming the spouts; this is not earlier
than the rebuilding of the house A.D. 63. There is also much terracotta
work in the house of the Faun.[2459] Comic masks were used both as
spouts and as antefixes, the exaggerated mouth of the mask serving
admirably for the former purpose.[2460] These date from the reigns of
Nero and Vespasian, and all seem to be from the same fabric, although
there is considerable variety in the types; the use of masks for these
purposes is not earlier than Nero’s reign (cf. the house of Sallust,
above). Besides the ornaments above mentioned the patterns on the
cornices include palmettes and floral scrolls, dolphins and Gryphons.

The roof-tiles were of the usual kinds, flat oblong _tegulae_ with
flanges, measuring 24 by 19 by 20 inches,[2461] with semi-cylindrical
_imbrices_. They were laid in lines parallel to the long ridges of the
roofs, so that the water converged into the gutter-tiles at the angles,
whence it fell into the impluvium. These gutters, however, were not
confined to the angles of the openings, but were sometimes ranged along
the whole length of the sides, as we have seen; those at the angles
only seem to be earlier in date. They are not found on the exteriors of
buildings. The front of the gutter was usually in the form of a
vertical kymation moulding, but was sometimes simply chamfered.
Antefixal ornaments terminating the covering or ridge-tiles are not
invariable, but are found at different periods. The earliest examples
are in the form of palmettes, but the later exhibit a great
variety[2462]: comic masks, a head in low relief on a palmette, or a
head surmounted by a palmette. Of the latter class thirty-eight were
found in 1861. In the Augustan period ideal heads of gods and demi-gods
are sometimes found.[2463]

Von Rohden, in summing up (p. 14), is of the opinion that terracotta
roof-decoration at Pompeii was _comparatively_ rare. In the whole
record of excavations only twenty-three water-spouts are mentioned,
though it is probable that many were never registered. In scarcely more
than twelve private houses have as many pieces been found as would
suffice for the whole of the atrium and peristyle roofs, and nearly all
of these are of late date. The discovery of isolated pieces in a house
seems to show that they were used up again in the restorations after
the earthquake of A.D. 63.

There are also some good examples of roof-tiles among those which have
been found at Ostia, both in baths and private houses; some of the
latter came from a house of which the brickwork bore inscriptions with
the names of consuls of Hadrian’s reign. The arrangement of the
roof-tiles is that described on p. 341; the antefixal ornaments are
usually in the form of palmettes or acanthus leaves, with maeander
below; but heads of deities, such as Venus and Neptune,[2464] or of
Medusa, and tragic masks were also found. Two exceptional examples had
groups in relief of Neptune drawn over the sea by hippocamps, and of
the statue of Cybele in the ship drawn by the Vestal Virgin
Claudia.[2465]

                  *       *       *       *       *

Tiles of the size known as _bipedales_ are also used for lining the
walls of rooms. They are found in Roman villas in Britain, and are
ornamented on one side with various incised patterns, made with a tool
in the wet clay. On some found at Ridgewell in Essex the decoration
consists of lozenges, rosettes, and other ornaments,[2466] like those
on the Pile Cinq-Mars already described; they are often found covered
with the stucco with which the walls were plastered. At Pompeii,
Orvieto, and elsewhere the stucco-painted walls were constructed with
_tegulae mammatae_ placed edgewise, and connected with the main walls
by leaden cramps, the brick lining being thus detached from the walls
by a narrow interval which served as an air-cavity.[2467] This was a
frequent proceeding, and was also contrived with flanged tiles; it
corresponds with the system prescribed by Vitruvius for keeping damp
from the painted walls of rooms.[2468] It was also largely employed in
baths and bathrooms, the object being both to keep the walls dry and to
allow hot air to circulate from the hypocausts and warm the rooms. In
the cold climate of Britain the Romans found this a universal
necessity, and instances may be observed in many of their villas; but,
as far as can be observed, the general method of warming was by an
extensive system of pipes under the floors rather than up the
walls.[2469] These tiles are pierced with holes, by means of which they
were attached to the walls by plugs or nails of lead. In the _castrum_
at Jublains a chamber is yet partly standing with one of its sides
coated with tiles of this kind.[2470]

[Illustration:

  From _Middleton_.
  FIG. 192. METHOD OF HEATING THE BATHS IN THE THERMAE OF CARACALLA.
]

               A A   Concrete wall, faced with brick,
                     shown in vertical and horizontal
                     sections.

               B     Lower part of wall, with no brick
                     facing.

               C C   _Suspensura_, or upper floor of
                     Hypocaust, supported by pillars.

               D D   Another floor, with support only at
                     edges.

               E E   Marble flooring.

               F F   Marble plinth and wall lining.

               G G   Under floor of Hypocaust, paved
                     with large tiles.

               H H   Horizontal and vertical sections of
                     flue-tiles lining wall of
                     Calidarium.

               _a a_ Iron hold-fasts.

               J J   Socket-jointed flue-pipe of
                     Tepidarium.

               K     Rain-water pipe (in horizontal
                     section).

               L L   Vaults of crypt, made of pumice-
                     stone concrete.

More commonly, however, a peculiar kind of tile was used for warming
the hot rooms (_sudationes_) of baths, and in villas when required.
They were hollow parallelopipeds, known as _tubi_, with a hole in the
side for the escape of the air which traversed them, the usual
dimensions being about 16 by 6 by 5 inches.[2471] Seneca speaks of
pipes inserted in walls, which allowed the warmth to circulate and warm
both the upper and lower stories equally[2472]; and the younger Pliny
mentions the air-holes (_fenestrae_) in the pipes which warmed his
bedroom, by means of which the temperature could be regulated at
pleasure.[2473] Sometimes, as in the baths of Caracalla and the house
of the Vestals, the whole side of a wall was composed of flue-tiles
covered with cement,[2474] which was made to adhere by scoring the
sides with wavy or diagonal lines, as in the flat tiles described
above, and as is often done in modern building. The whole system of
heating, which may be seen in the baths of Caracalla, is very
instructive (Fig. 192): the walls were of concrete with brick facing,
through which a system of flues of socket-jointed tiles passes upwards
from the hypocaust below, effectually warming every part.[2475]

[Illustration: FIG. 193. FLUE-TILE WITH ORNAMENTAL PATTERNS.]

The hollow tiles often assume a more ornamental appearance (as in Fig.
193), the patterns scratched on them taking the form of lozenges and
diapers, chevrons, chequers, and rosettes, as may be seen in a Roman
villa at Hartlip in Kent, where other tiles are simply scored with
squares.[2476] This villa is remarkable for the extensive use of tiles
throughout; even the staircases are constructed with them. Others found
in Essex and Surrey have dogs, stags, and initial letters among
foliage; one found in London had among the wavy lines of pattern the
letters Px Tx[2477]; and another, from Plaxtol in Kent, the local
maker’s name, CABRIABANTI.[2478] These hollow tiles, which are
generally of the same clay as the roof-tiles, were also occasionally
used as pillars of hypocausts,[2479] but for this purpose columns of
_tegulae bessales_ were more usual, as Vitruvius implies.[2480] Many
examples may be seen in the Roman villas of Britain, as at Cirencester,
Chedworth, Lympne, and Wroxeter. In a villa found at Carisbrooke, Isle
of Wight, the whole bath was constructed of tiles, the floor supported
by _pilae_ of the same.[2481] At Bath the hollow tiles are actually
used as _voussoirs_ for arches and vaults.[2482]

Through these chimneys—for this is what they practically were—the hot
air circulated and gave an imperfect warmth to the rooms, the heat
radiating from the walls or penetrating through the air-holes.[2483]
The pipes standing close to one another virtually made up the wall; but
the exact method by which the warming was accomplished, without great
inconvenience to the occupiers of the rooms, is not quite clear. It is
not difficult to imagine that the tiles would have warmed rooms merely
by the introduction of hot air circulating through them, even though
covered with stucco. On the other hand, the apertures for admitting the
air into the rooms, if of any size, must also have admitted smoke from
the hypocausts, and interfered with the ventilation. It may be that
they were not made for this purpose at all, but only for fastening the
pipes together or to the walls. Another difficulty is the method in
which the flues made their exit into the open air. It has been
suggested, partly on the analogy of a mosaic found in Algeria, that
they ended above in an arrangement like a chimney-stack. There is,
moreover, a terracotta roof-tile in the Museo delle Terme at Rome with
a circular pipe, 8 inches in diameter, projecting from its upper
surface.[2484]

Terracotta pipes, or _tubuli_, of cylindrical form, were sometimes
employed by the Romans for conveying or distributing water, but the
more usual material for this purpose, especially for drinking-water,
was lead; the latter were called _fistulae_.[2485] The Venafrum
inscription, an edict of the Emperor relating to the water-supply of
the town, mentions _canales_, _fistulae_, and _tubi_.[2486] Vitruvius
calls the _canales structiles_, implying that they were of
masonry.[2487] Pliny speaks of _tubi fictiles_ used for conduits from
fountains,[2488] and Vitruvius recommends the use of terracotta pipes
(_tubuli fictiles_) in aqueducts.[2489] Examples of clay piping are
preserved in the Museo delle Terme at Rome. At Marzabotto, near
Bologna, terracotta pipes were used for carrying off the water from the
roof of a house, by means of a straight tube through the wall fitting
into another which curved upwards inside.[2490] These date from the
fifth century B.C. Other examples have been found in Rome and
Italy,[2491] and specimens found on the Rhine were 21½ inches long, of
which ¾ inch was inserted into the adjoining pipe, and 3½ to 4½ inches
in diameter. Terracotta was also used for cisterns, as at
Taormina,[2492] and for aqueducts; but Lanciani has pointed out that
its use in these ways was confined to irrigating purposes. The Campagna
of Rome was formerly extensively drained with these tiles, and owed to
that circumstance much of its ancient healthfulness.

Of the use of tiles in pavements there is frequent mention in Roman
writers.[2493] For this purpose complete tiles were seldom used, at any
rate in Italy; but in Britain it was not at all uncommon, as in the
villa at Hartlip already mentioned. On the other hand, hypocausts were
regularly paved with tiles, as in the Baths of Caracalla (Fig. 192
above),[2494] and in an example found at Cirencester, where the tiles
are flanged.[2495] But in another form tiles played a considerable part
in Roman methods of paving. Pliny and other writers[2496] speak of
_pavimentum testaceum_ or _opus signinum_ as the usual pavement for
rooms, especially those liable to damp, such as kitchens and
outbuildings, or for baths and cisterns. This was made of a layer of
fragments of tiles stamped and pounded into a firm solid mass, combined
with mortar. It corresponds to the _nucleus ex testis tunsis_ of
Vitruvius, which (to a depth of six inches) was laid on the _rudus_ or
coarser concrete. On this was laid the flooring, consisting either of
tiles or marble slabs, or more generally of mosaic. The Baths of
Caracalla again afford a good illustration of the process.[2497] In the
mosaics too fragments of clay were often used, especially for producing
red or black colour.[2498] Vitruvius and other writers allude to this
practice,[2499] and the former also speaks of _testacea spicata_, a
kind of false mosaic made with small bricks about 4 inches by 1 inch,
set on edge to form a herring-bone pattern. In the Guildhall Museum is
part of a tesselated pavement of concrete, faced with small bricks
about an inch square.

One of the most interesting uses of tiles by the Romans is in
connection with their tombs. Not only are they used in the construction
of the more magnificent edifices (cf. p. 336), but they were also often
employed (as in Greece) for the humbler graves. For the latter, three,
or sometimes six, _tegulae bipedales_ were set up in the form of a
prism, one forming the floor, the other two the gabled covering which
protected the body from the superincumbent earth. Within this were laid
the _ollae_ or sepulchral urns which held the ashes of the dead, and
other vases. A tomb found at Litlington in Cambridgeshire was covered
with a large flanged tile, which protected the pottery buried
underneath[2500]; and at Eastlow Hill in Suffolk a tomb was found
roofed with twelve rows of flanged tiles, each side in rows of
four.[2501] In some of the tombs of Greece belonging to the Roman
period semi-cylindrical tiles were used for this purpose. In the
provinces the tiles often have impressed upon them in large letters the
names of the legions which garrisoned the various cities. The tiles of
Roman tombs at York are inscribed with the names of the sixth and ninth
legions which were quartered there: as LEG · VI · VICT · P · F, _legio
sexta victrix pia fidelis_; LEG · IX · HISP (or VICT), _legio nona
Hispana_ (or _victrix_).[2502] At Caerleon (Isca Silurum) the bricks
bear the name of the second or Augustan legion: LEG · II · AVG.[2503]
The stations of the twentieth legion may also be traced at Chester in
this manner; the tiles are inscribed LEG · XX · V · V.[2504] They were
placed at the foot of the tomb like tombstones, in order to indicate
who was buried beneath, the inscriptions being written across the
breadth of the tile. They are of very different dates, some of those in
Britain being apparently as late as the introduction of Christianity.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The extent to which bricks and tiles were used in Roman buildings under
the Empire may be gauged by the number of those with inscriptions which
remain; a whole section of the Latin _Corpus_ (see below) is devoted to
those found in Rome alone, numbering some two thousand. Many of them
have been removed to the museums from the principal edifices, such as
the Pantheon, the Coliseum, the Circus Maximus, the Baths of Titus and
Caracalla, the Basilica of Constantine, and the Praetorian Camp. Other
inscriptions have been found on tiles removed from such buildings and
used to repair the roofs of churches in Rome. Such places as Bologna,
Cortona, Tibur, and Ostia have also produced numerous inscribed tiles
of this class. The use of such stamps was to guarantee the quality of
the clay. To the topographer, as will be seen, these stamps are often
of great value; and had the custom of placing on them the names of the
buildings for which they were intended been less rare, they might often
have afforded valuable evidence as to doubtful sites. Besides their
topographical value, the tiles also help to settle the succession of
consuls, and throw great light on the economy of the Roman farms and
the possessions of the great landed proprietors. The uninterrupted
series, extending from the times of the Caesars to the age of Septimius
Severus, of names of proprietors, potters, and estates, tells much of
the internal condition of Italy, and of one of the sources of revenue
to the Roman nobility.[2505]

The stamps found on bricks and tiles are of four kinds—rectangular,
semicircular, circular, and crescent-shaped. The inscriptions are in
raised letters in all cases, but instances are also known of incised
inscriptions, written without frames across the tile. After the time of
Diocletian the only forms found are square, circular, and octagonal;
the square stamps always have straight inscriptions. On the circular
stamps the inscriptions are placed in a circle, in one or two lines,
and the beginning is determined by a small cut-out circle at the edge
of the stamp, thus 20[22]orbiculus known as the _orbiculus_; apart from
this its object is uncertain. In later stamps the inscription often
reads backwards, or certain letters are reversed. The letters were cut
straight in a mould and lie in the plane of the surface, being of
rectangular section, not wedge-shaped, as in inscriptions on marble.
During the Republican period and the first century of the Empire a
plain “block” type is used; then the letters become smaller and more
elegant, with bars at the ends of the _hastae_, as 20[54]E, M etc.
Finally they show a tendency about A.D. 200 to become broader and
shorter: 20[76]E, M, S At and after the time of Diocletian the forms
become very varied. Punctuation in the best period takes the form of a
15[17]triangle afterwards the mark becomes vague in form. Ligatured
letters are rarely found after the time of Diocletian, but are common
in the best period; sometimes more than two are combined.[2506] The
stamps with which the letters were made were usually of wood or bronze,
but have not been preserved.

In the centre of the stamp it was customary to place an emblem or
device of some kind, perhaps in view of a law which obliged brick and
tile makers to affix distinctive marks or emblems on their bricks; but
the devices are not peculiar to individual workshops, and some
potteries, such as the Terentian (see below), used several. They may be
compared with the countermarks or small adjuncts on the coins of the
Republic, and the seals and stamps on the wine-amphorae of Thasos (Vol.
I. p. 158). Figures of gods, such as Mars, Cupid, and Victory, animals,
and even groups of figures, occur, and after the third century
Christian emblems are often found. It is most probable that they were
merely ornamental and without significance, except in certain cases of
canting or punning allusions. Thus M. Rutilius Lupus has a wolf;
Flavius Aper a boar; Aquilia an eagle; C. Julius Stephanus a wreath;
and Aelius Asclepiades a serpent, with reference to the god
Asklepios.[2507]

[Illustration: FIG. 194. STAMPED TILE (BRITISH MUSEUM).]

The most complete stamps have the date of the emperor or the
consulship, the name of the estates (_praedia_) which supplied the
clay, that of the pottery where it was baked (_figlinae_ or
_officina_), and that of the potter who prepared it; sometimes even of
the slave who moulded the tile, and even its very dimensions. Two
typical examples may be given from the British Museum collection,[2508]
of which the first (Fig. 194) is said to have been found in the
Catacombs at Rome. It has in the centre of the stamp a figure of
Victory, round which is the inscription in two lines, beginning with
the outer band:

    OPVS DOL(_iare_) DE FIGVL(_inis_) PVBLINIANIS
    (_ex_) PREDIS AEMILIAES SEVERAES

    “Pottery[2509] from the Publinian works, (the clay) from the estate
    of Aemilia Severa.”

The other has no device, but the last word of the inscription is in the
centre:

                     IMP ANTONINO II E(_t_) BALBINO COS
                     D P Q S P D O ARABI SER(_vi_)

  “The Emperor Antoninus for the second time and Balbinus consuls; from
    the estates (_de praediis_) of Q. Servilius Pudens, pottery
    (_doliare opus_) from the hand of the slave Arabus.”

The earlier stamps exhibit more method and precision; the later betray
comparative carelessness. In the latter the name of the emperor
sometimes occurs alone, and unusual expressions are introduced.
Contractions are invariable at all periods, and even the consuls are
sometimes only mentioned by initials; but by comparison of examples it
is possible to place them in the right order. Those found in Rome cover
the period from the reign of Trajan to that of Theodoric (A.D. 500),
but in other parts of Italy they are found dating as early as 50 B.C.
We are told that Theodoric, when he repaired the walls of Rome, made a
present of twenty-five thousand tiles for the purpose,[2510] and on the
tiles bearing his name he is styled “The good and glorious king,” with
the additional exclamation, “Happy is Rome!”[2511]

The estates on which the clay for the tiles was produced are called
_possessiones_; _privata_ (private property); _rationes_ (shares);
_insulae_ (blocks); or more generally, _praedia_. The latter word,
indeed, is almost invariably used down to the third century, the
others being more characteristic of the time of Diocletian. The
_praedia_ not only provided the clay, but in some cases also
contained the potteries. On some tiles _fundus_, which means a
country farm, is found. The proprietors of these estates were
imperial personages, persons of consular dignity or equestrian rank,
and sometimes imperial freedmen. Many tiles give merely the name of
the imperial estates, without mentioning the reigning emperor; in the
later ones, as in the Basilica of Constantine, it is usual to find
the expression OFF · AVGG ET CAES NN, _Officina Augustorum (duorum)
et Caesarum (duorum) nostrorum_.[2512] Several names of the Antonines
occur; also Annius Verus and his wife Domitia Lucilla, the parents of
M. Aurelius. Septimius Severus owned many _praedia_ which supplied
bricks for his palace on the Palatine.[2513] The Empress Plotina was
evidently a large landed proprietor, and we also find the names of
Aelius Caesar (Hadrian’s adopted heir), M. Aurelius, Faustina II.,
and Julia Procula. Among the names of inferior proprietors, unknown
to fame, occur Q. Servilius Pudens, T. Statilius Severus, and L.
Aemilius Julianus, priest of the sun and moon.[2514] Such names as Q.
Agathyrsus, Rutilius Successus, and Sulpicius Servandus seem to
denote imperial freedmen; the first-named styles himself AVG ·
LIB.[2515]

A remarkable fact in connection with these inscriptions is the
prevalence of feminine names, the quantity of tiles on which these are
found being enormous. The causes are various,—partly the renunciation
by emperors of their private fortunes in favour of their female
relations; partly the proscriptions which, from the failure of male
heirs, caused estates to devolve upon women; partly the gradual
extinction of great families. The important position held by freedmen
under the Empire is well known to the student of Roman history.

The potteries of the tile-makers were of two kinds—_figlinae_ and
_officinae_; but the former seems to be a wider and inclusive term—that
is to say, that one _figlina_ included several _officinae_ or
workshops. In the inscriptions, ex figlinis is usually followed by the
name of the owner, _ex officinis_ by the name of the potter
(_officinator_). The former expression is by far the commoner, and the
latter (OF or OFFIC) is more usually found on lamps and vases, although
after the third century it is invariable on the tiles. The _figlinae_
are always mentioned in a subordinate manner to the _praedia_, when
both are mentioned, as is usually the case. The potteries were mostly
outside the city, even at some distance. Localities are not often
mentioned, but we have the Salarian potteries on the _Via
Salaria_,[2516] and also mention of the _Via Nomentana_,[2517] and such
expressions as _Ad Aureliam_, _Ad Mercurium felicem_, or _Ad viam
triumphalem_. Stamps found in the walls along the Appian and Latin ways
show that potteries existed in the direction of the Alban and Tusculan
hills, and in other parts of Latium, as at Praeneste and Ostia. On the
north side they extended as far as Narnia and Ocriculum[2518] on the
Tiber. They are also found in Etruria and Campania. Tiles from Latium
were exported to Liguria, the Adriatic, Sardinia, Africa, Gaul, and
Spain.

Usually a descriptive epithet is associated with the word _figlinae_,
either of a geographical or personal character. Examples of the former
are Macedonianae, Rhodianae, and Oceanae. The latter give either the
name of an emperor, as Neronianae, Domitianae; or a Gentile or family
name, as Favorianae,[2519] Furianae, Publinianae, Terentianae, or
Voconianae. One of the names which occurs most frequently is that of L.
Brutidius Augustalis, a freedman; others are stamped EX FIGLINIS
PRIMIGENI SERVI DNI NOSTRI IMP—“From the potteries of Primigenius,
slave of our lord the Emperor.” Imperial slaves owned many potteries,
and others were owned by the emperors or other wealthy proprietors, and
administered by freedmen or slaves. The _officinae_ served to
distinguish the functions of the different _figlinae_. Thus the
establishment of M. Publicius Januarius, a freedman, is styled
_doliariae officinae_; or they are distinguished by separate names, as
Claudianae, Domitianae, and so on. The tiles from the potteries of
Asinius Pollio bear the name of C. Cosconius as maker, as do those of
Julia Procula’s potteries, being further distinguished as _doliares_,
_bipedales_, and _sesquipedales_.[2520] It would appear that the
potteries of private proprietors were under the direction of freedmen,
while those of the imperial estates were chiefly managed by slaves,
from whose labours large revenues were obtained.

There were many private potteries in Gaul and Germany.[2521] In the
neighbourhood of Saarbrück many tiles have been found with the maker’s
name, L. Valerius Labeius. Others with private names have been found at
Trier, one with the stamp of the _colonia_. Several potters with
Gaulish names are known, and probably FIDENATIS on a tile at Zulpich,
SECVNDANVS F(_igulus_ or _fecit_) and PACATVS F from Seligenstadt,
refer to craftsmen of that nationality.[2522] Often the master’s name
only occurs, of which possible instances are BELLICIANVS on a tile from
Caerwent, and PRIMV(_s_) on another from Colchester.[2523] In the
British Museum are tiles with the initials T · P · F · A, T · P · F ·
C, T · P · F · P, from Rodmarton in Gloucestershire.[2524] Tiles found
in the provinces also have the maker’s name simply, without indications
of date or the owner of the pottery, as on those from Seligenstadt
already cited. The makers must in all cases have been of inferior
condition, as implied in the example already quoted of the slave Arabus
(p. 354); and other names—Daedalus, Peculiaris, Primigenius,
Zosimus—belong to the same rank of life. Yet the occurrence of a single
name for a private individual is everywhere very common. On the other
hand, imperial slaves usually have two names given, and freedmen
three.[2525]

On the tiles of the freedmen of the Gens Domitia (dating about the
reign of Hadrian) is frequently stamped the formula VALEAT QVI FECIT,
“May he who made it prosper,” with the name of the representative of
the family in the genitive.[2526] On other tiles we find such
expressions as VTAMVR FELICES, “May we use it and be happy”[2527];
FORTVNA COLENDA, “Fortune is to be worshipped” (a second-century
tile)[2528]; and on others of post-Diocletian date, VRBIS ROMAE, “The
city of Rome”[2529]; SECVLO CONSTANTINIANO, “The age of Constantine”;
FELIX ROMA (on the tiles of Theodoric), “Happy is Rome.”[2530] Even on
sepulchral tiles of late Imperial times are stamped such aspirations
as, VTI FELIX VIVAS, “May you live happily.”[2531]

[Illustration: FIG. 195. INSCRIBED TILE FROM LONDON (GUILDHALL MUSEUM).]

Again, memoranda are found incised on the tiles, as on one at Hooldorn
in Holland, KAL · IVNIS · QVARTVS LATERCLOS N(_umero_) CCXIIII,
“Quartus (made) 214 tiles on the first of June”; and on another, found
in Hesse in 1838, STRATVRA TERTIA LATERCVLI CAPITVLARES NVM · LEG ·
XXII, “In the third layer large tiles of the number of the
twenty-second legion.”[2532] A tile found in Hungary had scratched upon
it two metrical lines in cursive writing:

    _Senem severum semper esse condecet_
    _Bene debet esse povero_ (sc. _puero_) _qui discit bene_[2533];

and on others names such as Tertius, Kandidus, Verna, were
incised.[2534] Idle boys in the brickfields often seem to have
scratched the alphabet or other words in the soft clay, and complete
Roman alphabets are found at Hooldorn[2535] and Stein on the
Anger[2536]; the letters I K L M on one at Winchester[2537]; on another
at Silchester is ... E PVELLAM.[2538] On a tile in the Guildhall Museum
(Fig. 195), found in Warwick Square, E.C., are the words AVSTALIS |
DIBVS · III | VAGATVRSIB | COTIDIM, of which no satisfactory
translation has been given, but it has been usually regarded as the
gibe of a fellow-workman at a devout individual.[2539] On another, now
at Madrid, the first two lines of the _Aeneid_ are written in excellent
cursive characters of the first century after Christ.[2540]

The Roman tiles, if rightly used, are found very useful for judging the
dates of buildings. For instance, a study of those in the Pantheon
showed that the walls were neither the original ones nor those built by
Agrippa in 27 B.C., but were restored in the second century or supplied
then with new brickwork. On the other hand, the stamps from the Flavian
amphitheatre and Thermae Antoninianae confirm the dates of those
buildings. Those tiles which bear the name M. Aurelius Antoninus as
consul[2541] seem to be the Emperor Caracalla’s. In the time of
Diocletian the dates cannot be definitely ascertained, but before his
time the shape of the stamp is a good criterion. Rectangular stamps are
found in the best period, and in the first century B.C. only one line
of inscription is usual. Two lines denote the period 50–100 A.D. or
later; semicircular or lunate forms came into use under Claudius, and
lasted to the end of the first century; perfect circles belong to the
same period. The type with the cut-out _orbiculus_ came in about Nero’s
reign, and the size of the _orbiculus_ gradually diminishes down to
that of Severus, while the inscriptions gradually increase in
length.[2542]

A considerable number of the Roman tiles are inscribed with the names
of the consuls of the current year in which they were made, presenting
a long and interesting series, from the consulship of L. Licinius Sura
and C. Sosius Senecio (A.D. 107) to that of Severus Alexander (A.D.
222). Many of these consulships do not, however, appear to have been
recorded in the regular _fasti consulares_ or official lists, and they
were probably _suffecti_, whose names were not recorded after their
temporary elevation. It seems likely that the occurrence of consuls’
names implies that such tiles were destined for public buildings, and
were so marked to prevent their being stolen with impunity. They are
fewer in number than those which have merely the names of _praedia_ or
potteries, but are yet sufficiently numerous to be an invaluable aid in
tracing the succession for upwards of sixty years. Inscriptions of this
class are only found on _opus doliare_, and chiefly in Italy. Their
appearance is probably due to some law passed by the Senate about the
reign of Trajan to regulate the potteries. As an example may be given a
tile from Hooldorn in the Netherlands, inscribed SVB · DIDIO · IVLIANO
· COSS[2543]; the date is A.D. 179, the name being that of the future
emperor (COSS is a mistake for COS).

The following examples are taken from Dr. Dressel’s scheme of the
chronological order of the stamps,[2544] and show the style of
inscription characteristic of the different periods:

I. First century after Christ.

  1.  (_a_) With name of master only (either of _praedia_ or
        _figlinae_):

          _Asini Pollionis._

     (_b_) With name of _officinator_ or potter:

          _C. Cosconi._

  2.  (_a_) Master and potter (often a slave):

          _Felicis Domiti Afri._

     (_b_) Master and _conductor_ (lessee of the pottery), or potter:

          _Tegula C. Cosconi, figuli Asini Pollionis._

  3.  (_a_) Master, potter, and name of pottery:

          _Amoeni duorum Domitiorum Lucani et Tulli, ex figlinis
        Caninianis._

     (_b_) Master, lessee or potter, name of pottery:

          _T. Grei Ianuari ex figlinis Caninianis duorum Domitiorum._

II. Second century to third century.

  1.  (_a_) _Ex praedis L. Memmi Rufi._

     (_b_) _Opus doliare L. Bruttidi Augustalis._

         _L. Lurius Martialis fecit._

  2.  (_a_) _Ex figlinis_ (vel _praedis_) _Domitiae Lucillae, opus
        doliare Terti Domitiae Lucillae_ (vel _ab Tertio servo_).

     (_b_) _C. Comini Proculi ex praedis Domitiae Lucillae._

        _Ex figlinis Q. Asini Marcelli doliare opus fecit C. Nunnidius
        Fortunatus._

        _Opus doliare ex praedis domini n(ostri) ex conductione
        Publiciaes Quintinae._

  3.  (_a_) _Ex figlinis_ (vel _praedis_) _Caepionianis Plotiae
        Isauricae, fornace Peculiaris servi._

     (_b_) _Opus doliare ex praedis duorum Augustorum nostrorum,
        figlinis Domitianis minoribus, Fulvi Primitivi._

During the greater part of the third century chronological indications
are absent, but about the time of Diocletian the practice of signatures
is revived. The inscriptions, however, differ now from the earlier
ones, not only in the forms of the letters and of the stamp, but also
in style; they are less regular in form, and present several
peculiarities. The expressions _opus doliare_ and _ex figlinis_ are now
no longer found, and in place of the latter _officina_ is invariable.
Many of the _officinae_ are the same as in the former period, but new
ones, such as the Britannica, Claudia, Gemella, and Jobia, occur, the
latter with the _cognomen_ Diocletiana. _Officina_ is sometimes used
twice over, for the pottery and for the workshop. In place of _praedia_
we have such expressions as _statio_, _rationes_, or _possessiones_.
Formulae are introduced in an abbreviated form which give the method of
administration or character of the estates: as R · S · P, _ratio summae
patrimonii or privatae_; S · P · C, _stationis patrimonii Caesaris_; S
· R for _summae rei or stationis Romanae_; S · P for _summae privatae_
or _stationis patrimonii_; S · R · F for _sacrae rationis fisci_; or
simply S for _stationis_ or _summarum_.[2545] Apparently several
_stationes_ might be united in one _officina_, or several _officinae_
in one _administratio_; the number of the _statio_ is given in some
instances. The name of the _statio_ may be replaced by that of the
potter; or merely the _administratio_ is given, as OFF · PRIVATA.
Besides the names of master, lessee, and potter, that of the
_negotiator_ is sometimes mentioned. We also find the _portus_ or depôt
in which the _tegulae_ were stored for distribution, as PORTU
LICINI,[2546] or the name of the building for which they were destined,
as PORTVS AVGVSTI,[2547] CASTRIS PRAETORI(_s_) AVG(_usti_) N(_ostri_),
HORREIS POSTVMIANIS.[2548] Some tiles dug up in Lambeth Hill, London,
on the site of the Post Office, now in the British and Guildhall
Museums,[2549] were impressed with the letters P · P · BR · LON or PR ·
BR · LON (Fig. 196), which have been interpreted as _publicani
provinciae Britanniae Londinienses_.[2550]

[Illustration: FIG. 196. INSCRIBED TILE FROM LONDON.]

Tiles made for military purposes are exceedingly common in the later
period, and the stamps probably had a double use. In the first place,
they show that they were made by the soldiers, from which we learn that
in the legions, as in a modern army, there were many men acquainted
with handicrafts. Secondly, they prevented theft or removal of the
tiles, and served as a “broad arrow” to denote public property. They
are not, of course, found in Rome, where there was no necessity for the
legions to make bricks or tiles; here the camp seems to have been
supplied by private individuals.

Of special interest are the inscriptions stamped on tiles which relate
to the military divisions stationed throughout the provinces of the
vast empire. These are found in soldiers’ graves (see above, p. 351),
as well as in their camps and quarters; they contain the names and
titles of the legions, and mark the extent of Roman conquest. Thus the
route of the thirty legions through Germany has been traced; and in
Britain an examination and comparison of such tiles shows the
distribution of military force and the migrations of different legions
from one quarter to another. The stamps are in the form of long labels
(_tesserae_), circles, or crescents, occasionally surrounded by a
wreath, or else in the shape of a foot, an ivy-leaf, or a vase; the
letters are in relief, sharply impressed, as if from a metal die. The
names and titles of the legions are given either in initials or in
contractions, as LEG · II · P(_arthicae_), and so on (see above, p.
351); sometimes the potter’s name is added, with FIGVLVS or FECIT.[2551]

The tiles of the first legion have been found at Mainz and Nimeguen;
those of the second, or Parthian, at Darmstadt, Ems, Hooldorn,
Caerleon, and the Lake of Nemi[2552]; of the third, in Scotland; of the
fourth, at Mainz; of the fifth, in Scotland, and at Baden, Cleves,
Xanten, and Nimeguen; of the sixth, at Nimeguen, Neuss,
Aix-la-Chapelle, Darmstadt, and Windisch; the seventh, at
Aix-la-Chapelle and Xanten; the eighth, at Mainz, Baden, and elsewhere;
the ninth, at Baden and York; the tenth, at Nimeguen, Hooldorn, Vienna,
and Jerusalem; the twentieth, at Chester[2553]; and so on down to the
thirtieth.[2554] At Bonn tiles have been found of the _Legio
Cisrhenana_ on the left bank of the Rhine, and of the _Legio
Transrhenana_ on the right bank. Cohorts have also left their names on
tiles: the second Asturian at Acsica on the Roman Wall[2555]; the
fourth (_Breucorum_), at Huddersfield[2556]; the fourth Vindelician, at
Frankfurt, Mainz, and Wiesbaden[2557]; the Ulpian Pannonian at
Buda-Pesth.[2558] The _vexillationes_, whose main body was at Nimeguen,
are similarly recorded; a British _vexillatio_ was attached to the army
at Hooldorn[2559] and Nismes, and another to that of Lower Germany, as
instanced by tiles inscribed VEX · EX · G · INF (_vexillatio exercitus
Germaniae inferioris_), found at Utrecht and Nimeguen in the
Netherlands, and at Xanten in Germany.[2560] Tiles of the British
fleet, CL(_assis_) BR(_itannica_), have been found at Boulogne, Lympne,
and Dover.[2561]

                      2. TERRACOTTA MURAL RELIEFS

Terracotta =mural decoration= was largely employed by the Romans for
the interior and exterior of their buildings, in the form of slabs,
ornamented with reliefs, which were placed round the impluvium or on
the walls. Sometimes they seem to have formed a sort of hanging
“curtain” round the lower edge of the cornice, as the open-work
patterns along the edges seem to imply, a method of decoration which we
have already met with at Civita Lavinia (Vol. I. p. 101), where also
the hanging slabs are bordered with patterns in outline or open-work.
But, as also at Civita Lavinia, these slabs seem to have been
frequently used as _antepagmenta_,[2562] being pierced with holes,
which imply that they were nailed against the walls. In the Casa dei
Cecilii at Tusculum there is evidence that they were used as
wall-friezes,[2563] and those found at Pompeii (where they are very
rare) also have holes for fastening to walls. It may be to the
first-named variety that Festus refers when he speaks of _antefixa_ of
fictile work which are affixed to the walls underneath the
gutters.[2564] There is also a reference to them in Cicero, who, in
writing to Atticus, says, “I entrust to you the bas-reliefs (_typos_)
which I shall insert in the cornice of my little atrium.”[2565]

The slabs are usually about 18 inches long by 9 or more high, and 1 to
2 inches thick; they have nearly all been found at Rome, but specimens
are also known from Civita Lavinia, Cervetri, Nemi, Pompeii, and Atri
in Picenum.[2566] The British Museum possesses a very fine series,
numbering, with fragments, one hundred and sixty, nearly all of which
were collected by Mr. Charles Towneley at Rome[2567]; and there is an
equally fine collection in the Louvre, which came from Signor Campana,
who devoted a large work to the illustration of them.[2568] Other good
examples, some of which were found in the Baths of Caracalla, are in
the various collections at Rome.[2569]

The reliefs were evidently cast in moulds, as many subjects are
repeated over and over again, or at least with only slight differences;
moreover, the relief is low, with sharp and definite outlines, such as
a mould would produce. Among the British Museum examples a group of
Eros, a Satyr, and a Maenad is repeated in three cases (D 520-522),
with no variations except in the colouring; another of Dionysos and
Satyr three times (D 528-530), with only one small variation. It is
evident that in the latter, as in some other cases, the relief had been
retouched before baking. Reliefs entirely modelled are of much rarer
occurrence, but exhibit considerable artistic feeling and freedom, as
in an instance in the British Museum (D 651), which represents the
sleeping Endymion; the hair is so fine and deeply cut that it could not
possibly have been produced from a mould. The moulds may have been made
of various materials—wood, stone, metal, or gypsum, as well as
terracotta. Circular holes are left in the slabs for the plugs—usually
of lead—by which they were attached to the woodwork or masonry. The
clay varies in quality and appearance, being often coarser than that of
Greek reliefs, and mixed with coarse sand in order to make it stronger
and more durable; in tone it varies from a pale buff to dark
reddish-brown. Traces of colouring are often found on the slabs,[2570]
and the background in some cases (as B.M. D 577, 623) was coloured a
bright blue; the figures, or more often details such as hair, etc.,
were usually painted red, yellow, purple, or white. These colours are
not fired, as in the earlier terracotta reliefs, but painted in
_tempera_, and their use is entirely conventional. The slabs are
ornamented above and below with bands or cornices in the form of
egg-and-tongue mouldings, or a system of palmettes and intersecting
arches; these are sometimes in low relief on a band, sometimes partly
in outline or open-work.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                               PLATE LXI

[Illustration:

  ROMAN MURAL RELIEFS.

  1. ZEUS AND THE CURETES; 2. DIONYSOS IN THE LIKNON-CRADLE (BRITISH
    MUSEUM).
]

         ------------------------------------------------------

The figures are mostly in low relief, being usually grouped with large
flat surfaces between, in the manner of Hellenistic art; in some cases
the design is composed in such a way that the whole surface (except the
principal figures) is occupied by patterns of scroll-work or foliage,
more or less conventional. The compositions are either in the form of
narrow friezes, usually with rows of busts or figures of Cupids, or
square metope-like groups with two or three figures on a large scale.
For the narrower slabs the busts were preferred, owing to the scope
they gave for high relief, which better suited the distance from the
eye; but this rule is not invariable. The style is, in general, bold
and vigorous, and, though essentially architectural, not devoid of
dignity and beauty; but it is somewhat conventional, and at times even
archaistic.[2571] Those found at Pompeii are usually of remarkably good
style, especially the Nereid frieze,[2572] with its rich colouring.
These are earlier than the earthquake of A.D. 63, and probably belong
to the Augustan period, to which also the majority may be assigned. On
one or two names of potters are found, such as Annia Arescusa(na) and
M. Antonius Epaphras in the British Museum.[2573]

The subjects on these reliefs cover a very wide field, almost as wide
as those on the painted vases, and quite as wide as those on the Roman
lamps. In many cases they are doubtless copies of well-known works of
art, and may even go back to prototypes of the fifth century, as in the
case of a figure of a girl in the British Museum (D 648), or one of
Eros, conceived as a full-grown youth, in the Campana collection.[2574]
Others, again, present points of comparison with the Hellenistic
reliefs, as is the case with that representing the visit of Dionysos to
a mortal (B.M. D 531). Lastly, we find in the reliefs, as also on the
Arretine vases (below, p. 492), a series of types closely related to
the New Attic reliefs, in which it was sought to revive an older
style[2575]; among the types borrowed from these originals are Maenads
in frenzy or dancing in various attitudes,[2576] and the figures of the
four Seasons.[2577] Among those which reflect the character of their
time rather than the spirit of Greek art, we have representations of
Egyptian landscapes, or Egyptian deities and emblems; scenes from the
circus or gladiatorial arena; and quasi-historical subjects, such as
triumphs over barbarian enemies. Of mythological subjects, the most
popular are Dionysiac scenes or groups; next to these, Apollo,
Aphrodite, Eros, and Victory. Heroic legend is represented by the
labours of Theseus, Herakles, Perseus, and Jason, and occasional scenes
from the _Iliad_ and _Odyssey_. Lastly, there are a certain number
which are purely decorative, with a single figure of Eros or Victory
(treated in archaistic fashion), or an ideal head surrounded by
elaborate and graceful scrolls or acanthus foliage; others, again, have
conventional groups of two priestesses or canephori, with a candelabrum
or a foliated pattern between (Plate LXII.), a mask between two Cupids,
and so on. Even the figures in some cases tail off into conventional
patterns.[2578]

To mention a few of the more interesting subjects in detail, it may
suffice to quote examples from the two best-known collections—those of
the British Museum and Louvre. Beginning with the Olympian deities, we
have the infant Zeus in the cave on Mount Ida, protected by the
Curetes, who dance above him, wielding swords and shields (Plate LXI.);
in one instance he is in his nurse’s arms.[2579] On a narrow frieze the
busts of Zeus, Ares, Hera, and Athena are represented[2580]; Apollo
receives a libation from Victory,[2581] or a warrior consults his
oracle, indicated by a bird in a cage[2582]; Aphrodite is seen riding
on a sea-horse or on a goose.[2583] Eros or Cupid appears in various
attitudes and combinations of figures: flying, embracing Psyche, or
being embraced by a Satyr; accompanying Aphrodite, Triton, and the
Nereids; a pair on either side of a mask of Triton or Medusa; or a
group of three struggling under the weight of a heavy garland of fruit
and flowers.[2584] Busts or masks of Demeter,[2585] Zeus Ammon, and
Triton are also found; a group of Aphrodite and Peitho; and the three
Eleusinian deities, Demeter, Persephone, and Iacchos.[2586]

The Dionysiac scenes are very frequent, though often of little
interest, and mere groups without definite action. The best known is
the reception of Dionysos in the house of a mortal,[2587] a subject
formerly interpreted as his reception by Ikarios at Athens (cf. p.
139); this type is remarkable for its rich and elaborate composition,
probably derived from a Hellenistic original. A very effective
composition is that of a dancing Satyr and Maenad swinging the infant
Dionysos in a ?????? (_vannus_) or winnowing-van, which serves as his
cradle (Plate LXII.).[2588] Among other scenes may be mentioned
Dionysos giving drink to a panther; two Satyrs standing on tiptoe to
peep into a laver; Satyrs gathering or pressing grapes (of which many
replicas exist), or working an oil-press; Ampelos (the personified
vine) between two Satyrs[2589]; Bacchic processions, sacrifices, or
ceremonies[2590]; and friezes of Bacchic masks and masks of Pan.[2591]

Among other deities Victory is by far the most common. She is usually
represented slaying a bull for sacrifice, a subject of which there are
two principal varieties, according as she turns to right or left. The
motive is a well-known one, and found in fifth- and fourth-century art,
from the balustrade of the Nike temple at Athens onwards.[2592] She is
also depicted flying with a wreath, or as a conventional archaistic
figure between tendrils and scrolls.[2593] Of the figures of the
Seasons we have already spoken; they are characterised by the
attributes they carry, as a kid for Spring, corn for Summer, fruit for
Autumn, and a hare and boar for Winter. Masks of Medusa, Sirens, and
Sphinxes (both male and female) are found in compositions of a
decorative character.

Of heroic legends, the rape of the Leukippidae by Castor and Pollux is
repeated more than once[2594]; Herakles is seen contending with the
Nemean lion, the hydra, and the Cretan bull, and with Apollo for the
Delphic tripod[2595]; Theseus raises the rock which discloses his
father’s weapons (Plate LXI.), contends with the Marathonian bull, or
overcomes a Centaur; Jason builds the Argo, superintended by Athena,
and, assisted by Medeia, obtains the golden fleece; Perseus rescues
Andromeda, and brings the Medusa’s head to Athena; Aktaeon is slain by
his hounds.[2596] The Homeric scenes include Paris carrying off Helen
from Sparta (or, as some interpret it, Pelops with Hippodameia); Nestor
healing the wounded Machaon with a potion[2597]; Priam bringing
offerings to Achilles; Penelope mourning for the absent Odysseus;
Odysseus recognised by Eurykleia; and Orestes on the Delphic
omphalos.[2598] There are also numerous semi-mythical scenes, such as
combats between Amazons and Gryphons, between Amazons and Greeks, or
between Arimaspi and Gryphons.[2599]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                              PLATE LXII

[Illustration: ROMAN MURAL RELIEFS.]

         ------------------------------------------------------

With the exception of the Roman subjects from the circus and arena, the
remaining subjects are purely decorative, and of little interest; the
former, some of which have reference to the conquest of Dacia, admit of
the dating of the reliefs in the reign of Trajan. Others depict
gladiators contending with lions; chariots racing in the circus, which
is indicated by the obelisks and other adornments of the _spina_; or
colonnades adorned with statues of boxers and victorious
athletes.[2600] Some of the Egyptian subjects are interesting for their
local colouring, with their representations of the Nile, on which
pygmies ply a boat, among hippopotami, crocodiles, and lotos-flowers,
and ibises[2601]; but these compositions are more curious than
artistically effective.

                             II. SCULPTURE

                    1. ROMAN STATUES AND STATUETTES

In the earlier ages of Rome the laws and institutions, based without
doubt on the sentiments of the people, were unfavourable to art. Numa
was said to have prohibited the representation of the deity in human
form,[2602] and the statues of great men were not allowed to exceed
three Roman feet. To women the privilege of having statues was not
conceded until much later. Pliny constantly compares the luxury of his
own day with the simplicity of early times, to the disadvantage of the
former, dwelling fondly on the times when men could be content with
plain terracotta images, and it was not necessary or possible to make a
display of silver and gold.

Most of the ancient statues of the Romans were of terracotta, a fact to
which constant allusion is made by their writers. Juvenal speaks of “a
fictile Jove, not spoiled by gold”[2603] and Propertius speaks of the
early days of the golden temples, when their gods were only of
clay.[2604] Similarly Pliny expresses his surprise that, since statuary
in Italy goes back to such a remote period, statues of clay should even
in his day still be preferred in the temples.[2605] Vitruvius alludes
to the favourite Tuscan fashion of ornamenting pediments with _signa
fictilia_,[2606] examples of which, he says, may be seen in the temple
of Ceres in the Circus Maximus (see below), and the temple of Hercules
at Pompeii. Cicero speaks of a statue of Summanus on the pediment of
the Capitoline temple “which at that time was of terracotta,”[2607] and
Livy[2608] tells how in 211 B.C. a figure of Victory on the apex of the
pediment of the temple of Concord was struck by lightning and fell, but
was caught on the antefixal ornaments, also figures of Victory, and
there stuck fast. Though not stated to be of terracotta, these figures
would hardly be of any other material at that period. Other allusions
may be found in Ovid and Seneca.[2609]

In the early days of the Republic art was clearly at a very low ebb—in
fact, Roman art can hardly be said to have existed—and everything was
either borrowed from the Etruscans or imported from Greece. Hence the
statues of terracotta which adorned their temples are spoken of as
_signa Tuscanica_. The most celebrated works in ancient Rome were made
by artists of Veii or the Volscian Fregellae, such as the famous
quadriga on the pediment of the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, and the
statue of the god himself, described elsewhere (p. 314), which were
made by Veientine artists in the time of Tarquinius Priscus. Numa, ever
attentive to Roman arts and institutions, is said to have founded a
corporation or guild of potters.[2610] In 493 B.C. Gorgasos and
Damophilos, natives of Himera in Sicily, ornamented with terracotta
reliefs and figures the temple of Ceres at Rome (now Santa Maria in
Cosmedin).[2611] Their work, which is alluded to by Vitruvius in the
passage referred to above, was probably Greek rather than Etruscan in
style, as we have seen to be the case generally with the archaic
terracotta relief-work of Italy (p. 317). In the reign of Augustus the
temple was restored, and so great was the esteem in which the works of
these old masters were held that they were taken out of the walls and
framed in wood.

Coming down to later times, Possis, “who made fruit and bunches of
grapes,” and Arkesilaos are cited by Pliny,[2612] on the authority of
Varro, as modellers in clay. The latter made for Julius Caesar a statue
of Venus, which, although unfinished, was highly prized. Pliny also
mentions a terracotta figure of _Felicitas_ made by order of
Lucullus.[2613] It seems probable that the extensive use of terracotta
was mainly due to the absence of white marble in Italy, none being
discovered till imperial times. The siege of Corinth, which unfolded to
the eyes of the Romans an entirely new school of art in the quantities
of Greek masterpieces carried by Mummius to Rome, as also the conquest
of Magna Graecia and other parts of Greece, caused the old fashion of
sculpture in terracotta to fall into contempt and neglect. Henceforth
the temples of the gods and houses of the nobility became enriched and
beautified with the spoils of Greek art in all materials. Even at an
earlier period (195 B.C.) Cato in vain protested against the invading
flood of luxury, and especially against the new taste in sculpture.
“Hateful, believe me,” says he, “are the statues brought from Syracuse
into this city. Already do I hear too many who praise and admire the
ornaments of Corinth and Athens, and deride the terracotta antefixes of
the Roman gods. For my part I prefer these propitious gods, and hope
they will continue to be so, if we allow them to remain in their
places.”[2614] Yet up to the close of the Republic, and even later,
great works continued to be executed in terracotta, and were much
esteemed.[2615] The statue made for Lucullus is an instance, and
existing statues in this material, which we shall shortly discuss, are
probably of early Imperial date.

Few statues of any size in this material have escaped the ravages of
time, but there are some specimens to be seen in our museums. In the
Vatican is a figure of Mercury about life-size,[2616] and in the
British Museum a colossal torso,[2617] to which the head and limbs had
been mortised separately. A head of a youth from a large statue, found
on the Esquiline, was exhibited in 1888 at the Burlington Fine Arts
Club.[2618] A series of female figures, including a seated Athena,
ranging from two to four feet in height, was found in a well near the
Porta Latina at Rome in 1767.[2619] They were purchased by the sculptor
Nollekens, who restored them and sold them to Mr. Towneley, from whom
they were acquired for the British Museum. They are made of the same
clay as the mural reliefs already described, and are supposed to have
decorated a garden. Some of them have been identified, on somewhat
slight authority, as the Muses Ourania, Calliope, and Thaleia; there
are also two terminal busts of the bearded Indian Bacchus, which show
some traces of conventional archaism in their style. Other large
figures have been found at Nemi and Ardea in Latium, the latter being
now in the Louvre.[2620]

At Pompeii in 1766 three pieces of colossal sculpture in terracotta
were found in the temple of Aesculapius, representing a male and female
deity and a bust of Minerva with her shield. The two former used to be
identified as Aesculapius and Hygieia, but it is more probable that
they are Jupiter and Juno, making, with the bust, the triad of
Capitoline deities,[2621] a subject found on lamps at Pompeii. The
execution is careful, and they seem to date from the latter half of the
first century B.C. They formed the cult-statues of the temple. Other
statues appear to have been employed for adorning gardens, or for
niches in private houses, among which are a portrait of a seated
physician of great originality,[2622] a nude boy, and two actors.[2623]
A figure of Eros appears to have been attached to a wall as an
ornament[2624]; a fragment of a colossal Minerva found in a niche near
the Porta Marina is an excellent example of sculpture of the first
century B.C. Figures were also employed as architectural members, such
as the Atlantes supporting the entablature in the _tepidarium_ of the
Thermae in the Forum,[2625] dating from the Augustan period; the former
seem to be copied from originals in tufa. Of later date is a Caryatid
figure, probably of the Neronian epoch.[2626] These sculptures are all
of great importance for the history of art at the end of the first
century B.C., and as showing the continued popularity of terracotta;
the fashion, however, did not outlive the reign of Nero, and all those
in Pompeii must be anterior to the earthquake of A.D. 63.

Sculptors sometimes made preliminary models in clay of the statues
which they intended to execute in bronze and marble. This was not a
common practice with the Greeks, and the first sculptor who made use of
it, according to Pliny,[2627] was Lysistratos, the brother of Lysippos.
But at Rome in the time of Augustus it became much more frequent;
Pasiteles is said by Pliny[2628] never to have made a statue except in
this manner. These models, known as _proplasmata_, were much sought
after, as exhibiting the artist’s style and powers of conception in the
most free and unfettered manner, and those of Arkesilaos, another
artist of the period, fetched a high price.[2629]

                  *       *       *       *       *

=Terracotta statuettes=, similar in proportions and subjects to those
of Greece, are found in houses and tombs of the Roman period, and also
as votive objects on sacred sites. They were known to the Romans as
_sigilla_, and were employed as toys and presents, or placed in the
_lararia_ or domestic shrines; the same subjects are found applied to
all these uses. Thus in the _lararia_ were placed not only figures of
deities, such as Venus, Mercury, or Bacchus, but masks, busts of
children, and so on.[2630] Sometimes they served to decorate the walls,
as in the house of Julia Felix at Pompeii, where in the wall
surrounding the garden were eighteen niches, containing alternately
marble terms and terracotta figures, one of the latter representing a
woman feeding a prisoner with her own milk.[2631] In the Via Holconia
forty-three terracotta figures from a workshop were found, showing that
there was a local manufacture at Pompeii; the types were the same as in
the houses.[2632] It is noteworthy that the terracottas, of which some
two hundred have been found, were nearly all from the lower parts of
the city and the inferior houses, or in the domestic quarters of the
large houses. This implies that the richer Romans preferred bronze
statuettes for their shrines and household decoration. Comparatively
few were found in tombs.

A few notices relating to terracotta figures are found in Roman
authors. Martial speaks of a statuette of Hercules, which he calls
_sigillum_[2633]; he also alludes to a caricature of a man which was so
repulsive that Prometheus could only have made it when intoxicated at
the Saturnalia, and to a grotesque mask of a Batavian.[2634] In another
epigram he refers to the imitation of a well-known statue of a boy in
terracotta.[2635] Persius speaks of clay dolls (_pupae_) dedicated by a
maiden to Venus,[2636] and Achilles Tatius of clay figures of Marsyas
made by _coroplathi_.[2637] Elagabalus, by way of a jest, used to place
viands made of earthenware before his parasitical guests, and force
them to enjoy a Barmecide feast.[2638]

There is also an interesting passage in the _Satires_ of Macrobius
relating to the festival of the Sigillaria,[2639] at which large
numbers of terracotta masks and figures were in demand. This festival
took place on the twelfth to the tenth days before the Kalends of
January, forming the fifth to seventh days of the Saturnalia, and
corresponding to the 21st to 23rd of December. Ausonius says that the
festival was so named from the _sigilla_ or figurines,[2640] and
Macrobius more explicitly states that it was added to the Saturnalia to
extend the religious festival and time of public relaxation.[2641]
Subsequently he diverges into an excursus on the origin of the feast,
more curious than convincing. Epicadus is quoted by him as referring it
to the story of Hercules on his return from slaying Geryon, when he
threw into the river from the Pons Sublicius images of men which
represented his lost travelling-companions, in order that they might be
carried by the sea to their native shores.[2642] His own view is that
they represent expiatory offerings (_piacula_) to Saturn, each man
offering an _oscillum_ or mask on his own behalf in the chapel of that
god. Hence, he says, _sigilla_ were made by the potter and put on sale
at the Saturnalia.[2643] Elsewhere he states that clay _oscilla_ were
given to children as playthings at this season even before they had
learned to walk.[2644] The festival was indulged in by all classes of
society, who vied in making presents of statuettes and figures to one
another[2645]; and we are told that Hadrian exchanged gifts with
others, and even sent them to those who did not expect to receive
them.[2646] Similarly, Caracalla, when a child, gave to his tutors and
clients, as a mark of condescension, those which he had received from
his parents.[2647]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 197. MASK OF SATYR, WITH  NAME OF Q. VELIUS PRIMUS
  (BRIT. MUS.).
]

From the use of this word _sigilla_ (a diminutive of _signum_), for
terracotta figures, the makers came to be known as _sigillarii_, or
_figuli sigillatores_,[2648] and a street in which they lived was known
as the _Via Sigillaria_.[2649] There was also a market for the sale of
_sigilla_ for the feast near the Pantheon.[2650] Although the names of
makers are constantly found on Roman lamps and pottery, as well as the
tiles, they are very seldom found on statuettes, with the exception
mentioned below of those found in Gaul. But the name of Q. Velius
Primus, in a sort of mixture of Greek and Latin, is found in raised
letters on a mask of a Satyr in the British Museum (D 177 = Fig. 197),
and other names are occasionally found on the moulds. The social
condition of the Roman potter seems to have been much lower than that
of the Greek, who was often a person of respectable position; but this
may be partly due to the fact that his _clientèle_ was drawn mainly
from the poorer classes. He was generally a slave, sometimes a
barbarian, and even the masters of the potteries were only freedmen. As
we saw in the case of the tile-makers, the potters often worked on the
estates of wealthy or influential people, from which their clay was
obtained. More details of Roman potters will be found in the sections
dealing with tiles and lamps.

On the technical aspect of Roman terracotta figures little need be
said. The processes were practically the same as those described in
Chapter III. when dealing with the Greek terracottas. Large figures
were made from models (_proplasmata_) and built up in several pieces on
a wooden framework, known as _crux_ or _stipes_.[2651] A reference to
this method may be traced in a fable of Phaedrus,[2652] which describes
Prometheus as having made human figures in clay in separate pieces,
and, on returning from a supper with Bacchus, joined them together
wrongly, so that the sexes became confused. The smaller figures were
all made from moulds, by means of which they could be repeated with but
slight alterations. Few statuettes seem to have been made after the
second century of the Empire.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The range of subjects in Roman terracottas is much the same as in the
Greek figures of the Hellenistic period. At Pompeii _genre_ figures
predominate, including such types as gladiators, athletes in the
circus, slaves carrying bundles, and personages in Roman costume.[2653]
A favourite type at Pompeii is a mask of a youth in a Phrygian
cap.[2654] There is a decided preference shown for portraits and
grotesques. Von Rohden,[2655] in dealing with the question of the
extent to which these figures represent Greek or purely Roman types,
considers that although the influence of the former is still strong,
yet they are marked by such wide differences that they must be ranked
in the latter category. He dates them in the time of Vespasian, in
which the decadence which had begun with the later Hellenistic age is
in the Roman fabrics still more strongly accentuated. The style is
negligent, the proportions faulty, and the art of colouring practically
lost. They are only redeemed from insignificance by the taste for
portraiture and the interest which attaches to the reproduction of
motives borrowed from contemporary life.

The Pompeii figures may serve as typical Roman terracottas, but they
are also found elsewhere in Italy, as well as in other parts of the
Roman Empire; nearly all, however, are of inferior merit and execution.
At Praeneste in 1878, on the site of the temple of Fortuna Primigenia,
were found _genre_ figures and votive objects,[2656] and similar _ex
votos_ have come to light at Gabii.[2657] At Nemi figures have been
found which are obviously of Roman date, some of considerable
size.[2658] From time to time finds have been made in Rome, and there
is a pretty little head in the British Museum found in the Tiber (D
383), which, however, may be of Greek workmanship. The industry also
extended from Rome to the provinces, and even in Britain terracotta
figures are sometimes found, as at Richborough[2659]; at Caistor, by
Norwich, a terracotta head of Diana, of fairly good style, is
recorded.[2660] There are also in the Guildhall Museum some terracottas
in the coarse red clay which characterises most of the British
examples: a Venus on a swan; a female head with turreted crown, of
archaistic style, from Finsbury; and a large figure of Proserpina
holding a fruit, of very fair style, from Liverpool Street.[2661] A
figure of a boy on horseback is or was in the Museum of Practical
Geology.[2662]

                         2. GAULISH TERRACOTTAS

In Gaul there appear to have been very extensive manufactures of
terracottas, but not anterior to the conquest by Julius Caesar in 58
B.C. These statuettes were made for the Roman colonists, who introduced
the types of their own religious conceptions, but the makers were local
craftsmen. Potteries have been unearthed at Moulins on the banks of the
Allier, and in Auvergne and other parts of France, and even in Germany,
where one was discovered at Heiligenberg in Alsace, and others on the
Rhine (see below, p. 384). The finds on the Allier, made in 1857, give
a practically complete survey of the subjects; they are all now
collected in the museums of Moulins and St. Germain, and were fully
published at the time in a work by M. Tudot.[2663] The figures found
here are not from tombs, but were unearthed from the sites of the
potteries and from ruins of buildings; they are all made in a peculiar
white clay, whereas the figures of the Gironde district are grey or
black, and those of the Rhine Valley reddish, like those of Britain.
The technique resembles that of the Roman figures; there is no
vent-hole, and they usually stand on a conical base; the modelling is
very heavy, and the latest specimens are absolutely barbaric.

Until recently the subject of Gaulish terracottas had been greatly
neglected; Tudot’s plates were useful, but his text unsatisfactory and
devoid of method, there being no proper description of the plates. M.
Pottier has given a good summary of his work, and M. Héron de
Villefosse has also dealt with some aspects of the subject.[2664] But
they had not been treated as a whole and in relation to the subject of
ancient terracottas in general until 1891, when an important memoir by
M. Blanchet appeared, in which a complete survey of the Gaulish
terracottas was given.[2665] This must of necessity form the basis of
the present account.

In dealing with the technical character of the terracottas found in
Gaul, M. Blanchet points out that the white clay of which many are made
(_e.g._ those from the Allier valley) is not universal; some are made
of red or grey clay, which has turned white in the baking, apparently
by a process analogous to that used by the Chinese for porcelain,
others are actually covered with a white _engobe_ like the Greek
terracottas. This appears to have been done with a view to subsequent
colouring, which in nearly all cases has quite disappeared; but
statuettes with remains of colouring, made of purely red clay, have
recently been found in the neighbourhood of the Moselle and in
Germany.[2666] M. Blanchet quotes an example in the Museum at Angers,
with the name of the maker, P · FABI · NICIAE, which is coated with a
lead glaze like the enamelled wares described in Chapter III. He
considers that the moulds from which they were made were often of
bronze, and that bronze models were used as copies; but that they were
also of terracotta is clear from the numerous examples given by Tudot.
A terracotta mould for a figure of Venus Anadyomene, found at
Clermont-Ferrand, is in the British Museum, and another from Moulins is
for the back of the head of a similar figure, with hair elaborately
coiled.[2667] From the numerous moulds which have been found it may be
seen that the figures were cast in two pieces, longitudinally, the arms
being added afterwards, together with the circular plinth. The mould in
the British Museum may be cited as an example of one for the back part
of a figure; probably only the upper part was modelled.

Potters’ names are exceedingly common, not only on the figures, but
also on the moulds,[2668] and form two distinct classes, those on the
_exterior_ of the moulds, and those on the figures or _interior_ of the
moulds (which are obviously the same thing). The distinction is that
the former were merely for the identification of the moulds, while the
latter indicated the creator of the type and made him known to the
world, a feature which, as will be noted in Chapter XXIII. (p. 511),
reappears in the pottery of Westerndorff in Germany. Tudot gives an
example of a mould with the name ATILANO on the exterior and IOPPILLO
on the inside.[2669] Many of the names are identical with those of the
makers of vases,[2670] but the types and subjects are quite distinct
from those on the Gaulish _terra sigillata_. Those on the exterior of
the moulds are usually in a scrawling cursive type, whereas the other
class are in capital letters[2671]; the cursive characters resemble
those in use at Pompeii, but are not necessarily contemporary; they
are, however, not later than the second century. The influence of this
cursive character seems to have extended to the other class; for
instance, in the inscription given in Fig. 198 below, not only are the
G and S of cursive form, but E appears in the form II. Otherwise the
letters are in the ordinary Roman alphabet (with the exception of A,
which is sometimes 15[14]Attic alpha the forms E and II seem to have
been used indifferently in Gaul at all periods. The “signature”
sometimes combines the two names, as in the form

         AVOT        FORM
      SACRILLOS     CARATRI

which has been taken to mean _Sacrillos fecit forma Caratri_, “made by
Sacrillos from Caratrius’ mould.”[2672] Among the Roman names which
occur are Attilianus, Lucanus, Pistillus, Priscus, Taurus, and
Tiberius; among the Gaulish, Abudinus, Belinus, Camulenus, and
Tritoguno.

[Illustration:

  From _Blanchet_.
  FIG. 198. GAULISH FIGURE OF APHRODITE FROM NORMANDY.
]

A large majority of the existing statuettes were, as we have seen, made
in the valley of the Allier; these show more conspicuously than any
others, the influence of transplanted Graeco-Roman art. Curiously
enough none have been found at Lezoux, one of the chief pottery-centres
of Gaul, although there is abundant evidence that the vases and
statuettes were made in the same workshops (see above).[2673] M.
Blanchet considers that there was a large and important manufacture in
Western France, which may have been inspired by the Allier workshops,
but mainly exhibits native characteristics; he also notes the scarcity
of these figures in Southern Gaul (Narbonensis), which may perhaps be
explained by the preference there shown for bronze statuettes and vases
with medallions (p. 530).[2674] Other centres were Cesson, Meaux (where
Atilanus and Sacrillos can be located), Bourbon-Lancy in
Saône-et-Loire, and St. Rémy-en-Rollat (see p. 516), where vases also
were made of the local white clay. M. Déchelette has been able to
assign to the last-named pottery a date between A.D. 15 and 50. Another
fabric was in the neighbourhood of Liège, and in Germany there were
centres at Salzburg, and at Cologne, where the maker Vindex can be
dated in the reign of Postumus (A.D. 260-270).[2675] An important
maker, Pistillus, had a pottery at Autun; his statuettes are found all
over Gaul,[2676] and the name appears on vases and coins, and also in
an inscription.[2677] Julius Allusa had a workshop at Bordeaux. In West
and North-West France statuettes are found with the name of Rextugenos;
they are all of peculiar and original character, with highly-ornamented
backgrounds to the figures, and easily distinguished. The specimen
given in Fig. 198, representing Venus Genetrix, was found at
Caudebec-les-Elbeuf in Normandy (Seine-Inférieure); it bears the
inscription RIIXTVGIINOSSVLLIASAVVOT, _Rextugenos Sullias auvot_ (sc.
_fecit_).[2678]

An interesting find of terracotta figures was made at Colchester in
1866,[2679] consisting of thirteen figures presenting exact analogies
to the Gallo-Roman terracottas of the second period both in type and
style. One very poor specimen represents Hercules with club and
lion-skin; another a bull, and a third a bust of a boy (perhaps a
portrait of Nero or Britannicus); four are recumbent figures. The rest
are more or less grotesque, including caricatured seated figures
holding books or rolls, and a buffoon. With them were found vases in
the form of animals of yellow-glazed ware. Figures of suckling
goddesses (see below) have been found in Britain, and similar finds of
Gallo-Roman types in white clay in London, among them a Venus holding a
tress of her hair.[2680] Votive offerings of parts of the body and
figures of the goddess Fecunditas were found near the source of the
Seine, in a temple of Dea Sequana, the local river-deity.[2681] Other
finds have been made in Touraine, Anjou, La Vendée, Brittany, and
Normandy, brought by commerce from the Allier potteries; and in Germany
at Heddernheim and on the Rhine. Part of a group of some size in purely
Graeco-Roman style from the Department of Marne is now in the British
Museum (Morel Collection).

Tudot originally classified the Gaulish terracottas chronologically in
three periods according to style, and in this he has been followed by
M. Pottier. But M. Blanchet[2682] has pointed out that the former’s
method was altogether unscientific, that he trusted too much to the
evidence of coin-finds, and that he was altogether wrong in conceiving
the possibility of any being anterior to the Roman conquest. On the
whole the chronological data are exceedingly vague, and can only be
accepted in isolated instances, as in the case of the finds at St.
Rémy-en-Rollat (A.D. 15-50) or Cologne (A.D. 260-270), or where a
resemblance in the coiffure of the feminine figures to those of Roman
ladies can be traced. Some figures may probably be dated about A.D. 100
on the latter ground, the head-dress recalling those of Domitia and
Julia the daughter of Titus. But it can only be laid down with
certainty that the manufacture of statuettes was introduced into Gaul
with the _terra sigillata_ or ornamented red pottery at the beginning
of the Imperial period. Where there is a question of decadent or
barbaric style, as is undoubtedly often the case, it does not
necessarily imply a late date, but only that the inferior work is due
to the incapacity of some local artist, and figures of varying style
must frequently be contemporaneous.[2683]

In dealing with the types of Gaulish terracottas, their origin and
signification, M. Blanchet divides the subjects into three classes, of
which the first is not only the largest but the most interesting:
divinities, subjects from daily life, and animals. The deities are not
those we should expect from Caesar’s statement[2684] that Mercury,
Apollo, Mars, Jupiter, and Minerva represent the scale of popularity in
Gaul, for they are mainly variants of one type, that of Venus. Many of
these Venus figures reproduce types familiar in Greek and Graeco-Roman
art, such as the Anadyomene, and the Cnidian or Pudica type; but in the
majority she is frankly recognised as a Nature-goddess (Aphrodite
Pandemos or Venus Genetrix), and hence we find numerous examples in
which the old Oriental conception of the nude Aphrodite-Astarte with
pronounced sexual characteristics, so common in the primitive
terracottas of Chaldaea, Phoenicia, and Cyprus,[2685] once more
reappears, as in Fig. 198. Of almost equal frequency is the seated type
of the Mother-Goddess or ?????t??f??, suckling a child[2686]; this is
not peculiar to Gaul, but is found in the terracottas of Southern
Italy.[2687] We may compare also the Fecunditas types on Roman
coins.[2688] Blanchet thinks that the goddess Rumina may be here
intended, but prefers to adopt the general term of Mother-Goddess.

[Illustration:

  From _Blanchet_.

  FIG. 199. GAULISH TERRACOTTA:
  THE GODDESS EPONA.
]

Among other mythological types the Ephesian Artemis, Pallas, Mercury,
Epona (Fig. 199), and Abundantia occur; and among _genre_ subjects the
most interesting type is that of the Spinario, or boy extracting a
thorn from his foot, familiar in Greek sculpture. Slaves, caricatures,
and busts of ladies (see above) or children wearing the _bulla_, vases
in the form of heads, and busts affixed to plates, also come under the
latter category. Many of these are exceedingly rude and barbaric;
children are transformed into coarse grotesques, and animals look (says
M. Pottier) as if they had come out of a Noah’s ark.

The artistic origin of the Gaulish types has been discussed by M.
Blanchet,[2689] who points out that although the modern tendency is to
restrict the rôle played by Alexandrine art of the Hellenistic period
in influencing that of Rome,[2690] yet its effect on Gaul cannot be
altogether ignored. That Egyptian cults found their way into Gaul is
well known,[2691] and in the terracottas such types as Isis and Horus
appear, while comparisons may frequently be made with the late
terracottas found in the Fayûm and at Naukratis. But there was also a
stream of influence from Southern Italy, especially Campania, whence,
as we have seen, the Mother-Goddess types were largely derived.

As regards the uses for which these terracottas were made, much that
has been said on that head in Chapter III. will apply equally to Gaul.
They have been found not only in tombs, but in wells and rivers, and on
the sites of sanctuaries[2692]; but they do not seem to have had any
special funerary significance. The majority were probably used for
various domestic purposes in the houses, the figures of animals, for
instance, as toys, and were then buried with their owners. Those found
in wells or rivers may be regarded as votive offerings, as it is well
known that the Gauls were fond of throwing votive figures into rivers
or springs.

                  3. MISCELLANEOUS USES OF TERRACOTTA

It is impossible to enumerate all the purposes to which the Romans
applied terracotta, but a few peculiar uses deserve special notice. The
excavations at Pompeii have yielded several examples of its application
to the decoration of a _puteal_, the circular structure which protected
the mouth of a well; the core is of tufa or other hard material, and
round this are laid curved slabs of terracotta decorated with
reliefs.[2693] They are all of comparatively early date; one has
triglyphs and bulls’ heads in relief, and is stuccoed over. Instances
are also found at Pompeii of its use for table-legs, in the form of
figures of kneeling Atlantes,[2694] like those supporting the
entablature in the Thermae (p. 374), but sculptured in the round. Small
altars, or stands for holding lamps or for burning incense, supposed to
have formed part of the furniture of the domestic shrines, have also
been found in this material.[2695] Varro tells us that the _dolia_ or
large jars made by potters were used as cages for dormice which were
being fattened for the palates of Roman epicures[2696]; and Columella
gives instructions for the use of clay tiles in making beehives.[2697]
Porphyry implies that it was customary to hive bees in kraters or
amphorae of clay.[2698] Tickets (_tesserae_) for admission to the
circus or amphitheatre were also occasionally made of clay, and on them
were stamped letters or numbers referring to the position of the seat,
or representations of the animals exhibited. Two from Catania in the
British Museum[2699] have an elephant on the obverse and the letter A
on the reverse, showing that they were for admission to a spectacle in
which those beasts were shown. There are also possible instances of
_tesserae frumentariae_, or tickets for the supply of cheap corn in
time of necessity.[2700] Moulds of terracotta for making counters, with
masks or figures of Fortune and Isis, have also been found; there is an
example in the British Museum from Arezzo (E 46).[2701]

Herr Graeven, in a very interesting article,[2702] has recently
collected all the known examples (numbering some fifty) of money-boxes
in terracotta used by the Romans. There is no mention of such objects
in Latin literature, but it is probable that they were known as
_loculi_, and were made in imitation of the metal T?sa???? used for
keeping money in temples. Of this there is a clear instance in a
specimen recently found at Priene in Asia Minor,[2703] in the form of a
small shrine with a slit in the top. Graeven states that there is
evidence of their having been placed on a cornice which ran round the
walls of the rooms in the houses. This box has an additional hole at
the back for extracting the money, but the Roman specimens have only
one opening. An example of a clay treasure-box from Western Europe is
one in the form of a chest, 12½ inches high, with a bust of Apollo on
the top, found at Vichy, and now in the Museum at Moulins.[2704] It may
have been placed in a _sacellum_ or chapel for the offerings of those
who visited the medicinal springs.

Of the Roman money-boxes proper four main types may be distinguished.
The first, of which examples have been found at Pompeii,[2705] is in
the form of a small chest or coffer (_arca_), and may have been known
by the name _arcula_. The second type is that of a money-box in the
form of a vase.[2706] The custom of hoarding money in jars (_ollae_, p.
470) was universal in Roman times, as we know from the _Aulularia_ of
Plautus, the plot of which turns on this practice,[2707] and from the
numerous finds of coins in jars in our own day. None of these have any
ornamentation; they have been found in Germany, and there is a small
specimen in the British Museum from Lincoln,[2708] of spherical form
with a knob at the top. Aubrey records the finding of a similar one in
North Wiltshire.[2709] These appear to be of very late date.

The next two types are of much greater interest, not only from their
ornamentation, but from their form and the inscriptions which they
bear. In the one the box takes a flat circular form, closely resembling
the body of a lamp (the shape is that of Fig. 207), with a design
similarly placed in a medallion. One actually has a figure of Victory
with a shield, which reproduces the type of the New Year lamps
described on page 413 (B.M. No. 309), and has a similar
inscription.[2710] It may be supposed that these boxes were carried
round on New Year’s Day to solicit contributions, just as is done (says
Herr Graeven) by boys in Rome at the present time. Others have figures
of Fortune and Hermes in a shrine,[2711] the latter deity being of
course specially associated with money-making. These two examples have
their respective makers’ names on the back, C IVN BIT and PALLADI,
names which are also found on Roman lamps,[2712] another detail which
shows the close connection between these two classes of objects.

[Illustration:

  From _Jahrbuch_.

  FIG. 200. TERRACOTTA MONEY-BOX.
]

The last type to be described is shaped like a bee-hive, or, as in Fig.
200, like a circular temple, forms which were found convenient for the
then favourite design of a deity in a shrine. Among the examples quoted
by Graeven[2713] is one of the latter shape with Fortune (Fig. 200),
now in the Bibliothèque Nationale. Of the bee-hive form three may be
mentioned as presenting interesting features. One with Hermes in a
shrine has the maker’s name, PAS AVGV, which also occurs on
lamps[2714]; another, found on the Aventine, and now at Gotha,[2715]
has on the front the figure of a victorious charioteer, on the reverse
a slit for the coins, and the maker’s name, AEL MAX. D’Agincourt
suggested that this type of box was carried about by victors in the
games to receive donations. Lastly, there is one recorded to have been
found in the Baths of Titus in 1812, but now lost, which contained
coins of Trajan, and was inscribed FISCI IVDAICI CALUMNIA SVBLATA. The
evidence points to the dating of these two classes in the first century
of the Empire, or slightly later.

Terracotta moulds for false or debased coins of the Imperial period
have frequently been discovered in different parts of the Empire.[2716]
None, indeed, have come to light in Italy, but they occur in Egypt,
Tunis, France, on the Rhine, in Switzerland, Lower Austria, and
Britain. They were first noted by A. le Pois in 1579 at Fourvières,
where moulds were found of coins of Septimius Severus and his
successors. In 1697 and 1706 more of the same period, of local clay,
were found at Lingwell Gate, near Wakefield,[2717] in 1704 at Lyons,
and in 1764 at Augst, near Basle. In 1829 and 1830 further finds were
made at Wakefield, and again in 1869 at Duston, Northants.[2718]
Numbers have been noted from time to time in the museums of France and
the Rhenish provinces, the most interesting find being that made in
1829-30 at Damery, near Épernay, in the Department of Marne. In 1859 a
find of 130 moulds contained in a jug was made at Bernard; they appear
to have been hastily placed there and left by forgers. At Bordeaux in
1884 finds were made in the ruins of a pottery, and others more
recently at Autun and La Coulouche. In 1899 thirty-four moulds were
found at Susa in Tunis. The British Museum has a collection of moulds
of denarii from Egypt, mostly found at Crocodilopolis (Arsinoe) in the
Fayûm; they are of a deep brick-red local clay, but a great number are
burnt black.

Nearly all these moulds fall between the reigns of Septimius Severus
and Diocletian, but some of those at Bernard go back as far as Trajan,
and there are isolated instances of coins of Domitian at one end, of
Constantius II. and Julia Mamaea at the other. Caracalla and Elagabalus
are frequently represented, and those in the British Museum include
Albinus, Crispus, Constantine, Galerius, Licinius, and Macrinus. The
Damery find included thirty-nine moulds, comprising types of the coins
of Caracalla, the elder Philip, and Postumus; 2,000 pieces of base
silver coin, chiefly of Postumus; 3,900 bronzes of Constans I. and
Constantius, all evidently made together; chisels and remains of other
tools, and groups of moulds still containing the metal, and also lumps
of metal which had overflowed from the moulds.

The way in which these moulds were used is as follows. The complete
mould was composed of two shallow round boxes with hollow impressions
respectively of the obverse and reverse, obtained by impressing the
designs from genuine coins into the soft clay. The depth of the hollow
was so calculated that when the two were placed together the space
represented the required thickness. To cast the coins, a number of
these moulds were placed one on the other, and luted with clay to
prevent the liquid metal from escaping between the two pieces of each
mould; down the side of the column formed by the pile of moulds a
hollow cutting was made, at the base of which holes were pierced
corresponding to the cavities where the metal was to enter. The metal
was then poured into the hollow, and ran in through the holes as
required.[2719] Sometimes the columns were joined in groups of three
25[29]image for which a single column served; of this there is an
example at Damery, where each _rouleau_ contained a dozen moulds
(thirteen discs). In the Cabinet des Médailles at Paris there is an
example of one of these _rouleaux_ of moulds, found at Lyons in 1704
(Fig. 201),[2720] with the basin in which they were placed for the
casting. At Susa the moulds were fitted slantwise into a bronze tube.

[Illustration: FIG. 201. TERRACOTTA COIN-MOULD.]

It is not absolutely certain whether these moulds were all used for
fraudulent purposes by forgers; the find at Damery, for instance, was
made on the site of Bibe, an important station on the road from Rheims
to Beauvais, which would be too prominent a place for forgers to have
selected. It is much more likely that in such a case they were used to
make coins of inferior alloy, perhaps in some instances for the issues
of usurpers who, being at a considerable distance from the capital,
were unable to fill their military chests except with hastily cast
coins. The distant parts of the Empire in which these moulds are found
lend some colour to this theory. It will also be remembered that they
mostly date from the time when a debased coinage was current throughout
the Empire, beginning with the reign of Septimius Severus; this was put
an end to by Diocletian in 297. We may therefore suppose that they
represent, so to speak, officially recognised forgeries, emanating from
a kind of local mint for producing coins hastily for provincial use.
Hence the rapid spread of base money in the third century, which was
not only forced upon the State, but was also readily taken advantage of
by forgers.

-----

Footnote 2395:

  Pliny, _H.N._ xxxi. 47; Columella, _Re Rust._ iii. 11, 9.

Footnote 2396:

  _Etym._ xv. 8, 16: cf. xix. 10, 16.

Footnote 2397:

  Pliny, _H.N._ xxxv. 170; Nonius, p. 445, 22.

Footnote 2398:

  Columella, _Re Rust._ ix. 1, 2; Vitr. i. 5, 8; Varro, _Re Rust._ i.
  14, 4.

Footnote 2399:

  Vitr. ii. 8, 4; Varro, _Re Rust._ ii. 3, 6.

Footnote 2400:

  Columella, _loc. cit._: _paries crudo latere ac luto constructus_.
  Cf. Caesar, _Bell. Civ._ ii. 9, of a floor, and ii. 15; also Vitr.
  ii. 1, 7; Pliny, _H.N._ xviii. 301.

Footnote 2401:

  Vitr. ii. 3, 3.

Footnote 2402:

  _H.N._ xxxv. 170 ff.

Footnote 2403:

  Vitr. vii. 1, 7 and 4, 2; Pallad. _Agric._ i. 19, 1 and 40, 2;
  Wilmanns, _Exempla_, 2793-94; Marini, _Iscriz. ant. doliari_, 942-944.

Footnote 2404:

  Cf. Wright, _Celt, Roman, and Saxon_^4, p. 188.

Footnote 2405:

  Cf. Middleton, _Remains of Ancient Rome_, i. p. 59 (cut) =
  _Archaeologia_, li. pl. 1, fig. 5.

Footnote 2406:

  Marquardt, _Privatalterthümer_, p. 618.

Footnote 2407:

  Buckman and Newmarch, _Roman Art in Cirencester_, p. 64 ff.

Footnote 2408:

  Marquardt, _Privatalterthümer_, p. 618; Roach-Smith, _Collect.
  Antiq._ ii. p. 91.

Footnote 2409:

  _Remains of Ancient Rome_, i. p. 12: see also _Archaeologia_, xlix.
  p. 427, where it is pointed out that measurements of bricks form no
  guide to their date.

Footnote 2410:

  _Loc. cit._

Footnote 2411:

  _Jahreshefte_ (Beiblatt), i. p. 123.

Footnote 2412:

  ii. 3, 1.

Footnote 2413:

  This may be the origin of the foot-shaped stamp so common in Roman
  lamps and vases (see Blümner, _Technologie_, ii. p. 18).

Footnote 2414:

  Cf. also Wright, _Celt, Roman, and Saxon_^4, p. 186.

Footnote 2415:

  Vitr. ii. 3. This passage with Pallad. _Agric._ vi. 12 and Isid.
  _Etym._ xix. 10, 16 are the _loci classici_ on the subject.

Footnote 2416:

  Blümner, ii. p. 20, points out that there are very few instances of
  this, and perhaps Vitruvius’ idea was not practical.

Footnote 2417:

  Middleton, _Remains of Ancient Rome_, i. pp. 12, 62.

Footnote 2418:

  See Roach-Smith, _Illustr. Rom. London_, p. 112.

Footnote 2419:

  xxxix. 61 (?? p??????).

Footnote 2420:

  _Apud_ Non., p. 48 (s.v. suffundatum).

Footnote 2421:

  _De Div._ ii. 47, 99.

Footnote 2422:

  Vitr. ii. 8, 18.

Footnote 2423:

  _H.N._ xxxv. 173.

Footnote 2424:

  Vitr. ii. 8, 17.

Footnote 2425:

  _Ibid._

Footnote 2426:

  See Daremberg and Saglio, s.v. Aquaeductus; Middleton, _Remains of
  Ancient Rome_, ii. p. 323.

Footnote 2427:

  Suet. _Aug._ 28.

Footnote 2428:

  Borrmann, _Die Keramik in der Baukunst_ (Durm’s _Handbuch d.
  Architektur_), p. 51.

Footnote 2429:

  Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ iv. p. 11, pls. 5-6.

Footnote 2430:

  Nissen, _Pompeian. Studien_, p. 26; Mau-Kelsey, _Pompeii_, p. 36.

Footnote 2431:

  See Mau-Kelsey, _Pompeii_, p. 38.

Footnote 2432:

  _Archaeologia_, lii. p. 664.

Footnote 2433:

  Middleton, _Remains of Ancient Rome_, i. pp. 254, 301; _id._ in
  _Archaeologia_, xlix. p. 426.

Footnote 2434:

  See Dressel in _C.I.L._ xv. p. 9.

Footnote 2435:

  Mau-Kelsey, p. 38: but see Nissen, _Pompeian. Studien_, p. 59.

Footnote 2436:

  See Blümner, _Technologie_, iii. p. 146, where a good illustration is
  given.

Footnote 2437:

  _Archaeologia_, li. pl. 2, fig. 4; Middleton, _op. cit._ i. p. 55,
  fig. 6.

Footnote 2438:

  v. 10, 2.

Footnote 2439:

  See also on this subject Anderson and Spiers, _Architecture of Greece
  and Rome_, p. 137 ff.; Middleton, _op. cit._ i. p. 66, ii. p. 120,
  fig. 64.

Footnote 2440:

  See Middleton, _op. cit._ i. p. 62; _Archaeologia_, li. pl. 2, fig. 5.

Footnote 2441:

  Middleton, _op. cit._ i. pp. 12, 62.

Footnote 2442:

  _Etym._ xv. 8, 15; xix. 10, 15.

Footnote 2443:

  Henzen, _Inscr._ 6445, 7279-80.

Footnote 2444:

  Orelli, _Inscr._ 4190.

Footnote 2445:

  There are tiles in existence marked DOL · DELIC, _i.e._ (_opus_)
  _doliare deliciare_ (Marquardt, _Privatalterthümer_, p. 619).

Footnote 2446:

  The arrangement is well illustrated on pl. 6 of Campana’s _Ant. opere
  in plastica_ (from Ostia).

Footnote 2447:

  Vitr. v. 9, 7; viii. 7, 1.

Footnote 2448:

  Brongniart, _Traité_, i. p. 374; Marquardt, _Privatalterthümer_, p.
  620.

Footnote 2449:

  See Vitr. vii. 4, 2; Nissen, _Pompeian. Studien_, p. 65 ff.

Footnote 2450:

  Orelli, 1396: see _Sitzungsber. d. Wiener Akad. Gesellsch._ 1901, pt.
  2, p. 13.

Footnote 2451:

  Caumont, _Cours_, ii. p. 182.

Footnote 2452:

  _Ibid._ p. 184.

Footnote 2453:

  Brongniart and Riocreux, _Mus. de Sèvres_, i. p. 18.

Footnote 2454:

  _Bull. Arch. Nap._ 1853, pl. 14, p. 185.

Footnote 2455:

  Campana, _Ant. opere in plastica_, pl. 6.

Footnote 2456:

  For references to ornamental terracotta antefixes in Latin literature
  see below, p. 371; and cf. Livy, xxvi. 23, xxxiv. 4.

Footnote 2457:

  See for an account of these Von Rohden, _Terracotten von Pompeii_, p.
  5; also Mau-Kelsey, _Pompeii_, p. 251.

Footnote 2458:

  Von Rohden, pl. 7, fig. 1, from the Casa dei Niobidi.

Footnote 2459:

  _Ibid._, pls. 5, 2, and 6, 1.

Footnote 2460:

  For examples of this type see _B.M. Terracottas_, D 66 (from
  Corneto), D 700 (from Cumae), and D 706 (from Capua).

Footnote 2461:

  Mau-Kelsey, _Pompeii_, p. 36.

Footnote 2462:

  Von Rohden, pls. 14-16; 18, fig. 1: cf. _B.M. Cat. of Terracottas_, D
  699, from Pompeii.

Footnote 2463:

  _Ibid._ pls. 11-13.

Footnote 2464:

  Campana, _Ant. opere in plastica_, pl. 6.

Footnote 2465:

  Campana, pl. 6: cf. for the story Livy, xxix. 14, and Preller-Jordan,
  _Röm. Mythol._ ii. p. 55.

Footnote 2466:

  _Archaeologia_, xiv. pl. 13, p. 64: cf. Brongniart, _Traité_, i. p.
  367.

Footnote 2467:

  Middleton, _Remains of Ancient Rome_, i. p. 181, ii. p. 121 ff.

Footnote 2468:

  vii. 4, 2.

Footnote 2469:

  See Middleton in _Archaeologia_, lii. p. 663, for a general
  discussion of the subject; also Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ vi. p.
  122.

Footnote 2470:

  Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ iii. pl. 26, p. 114; _Illustr. Rom.
  London_, p. 115.

Footnote 2471:

  Marquardt, _Privatalterthümer_, vii. p. 620.

Footnote 2472:

  _Ep._ 90, 25 (xiv. 2).

Footnote 2473:

  _Ep._ ii. 17, 23.

Footnote 2474:

  So also in the Roman villa at Woodchester (Wright, _Celt, Roman, and
  Saxon_^4, p. 198).

Footnote 2475:

  Middleton, _op. cit._ ii. p. 113 ff.; _id._ in _Archaeologia_, li.
  pl. 3.

Footnote 2476:

  Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ ii. p. 21, pl. 8, figs. 1-2.

Footnote 2477:

  _C.I.L._ vii. 1250; Roach-Smith, _Ill. Rom. Lond._ p. 114, fig. 3.

Footnote 2478:

  _C.I.L._ vii. 1238.

Footnote 2479:

  _Archaeologia_, lii. pl. 20.

Footnote 2480:

  vii. 4, 2.

Footnote 2481:

  Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ vi. p. 125. Cf. _Arch. Journ._ viii.
  p. 30 ff. for another example from Hadstock, Essex.

Footnote 2482:

  _Archaeologia_, lii. p. 666.

Footnote 2483:

  Cf. Vitr. _loc. cit._

Footnote 2484:

  Middleton, _Remains of Ancient Rome_, ii. p. 123.

Footnote 2485:

  See Daremberg and Saglio, _s.v._, and cf. Vitr. viii. 7, 1; Isid.
  _Etym._ xv. 8, 17; xix. 10, 29.

Footnote 2486:

  _C.I.L._ x. 4842.

Footnote 2487:

  viii. 7, 1.

Footnote 2488:

  _H.N._ xxxi. 57.

Footnote 2489:

  viii. 7, 10.

Footnote 2490:

  _Mon. Antichi_, i. pl. 6, p. 326.

Footnote 2491:

  See Lanciani in _Atti dell’ Accad. dei Lincei_, Ser. 3, iv.
  (1879-80), p. 399 ff.

Footnote 2492:

  Avolio, _Fatture di argille in Sicilia_, p. 8.

Footnote 2493:

  See generally Blümner, _Technologie_, iii. p. 161 ff.; Middleton,
  _Remains of Ancient Rome_, i. p. 80.

Footnote 2494:

  _Archaeologia_, li. pl. 3.

Footnote 2495:

  Buckman and Newmarch, _Roman Art in Cirencester_, p. 64.

Footnote 2496:

  _H.N._ xxxv. 165; xxxvi. 188: cf. _Geoponica_, ii. 27, 5; Pallad. i.
  9, 4; Cato, _Agric._ xviii. 7; Vitr. vii. 1, 4; Columella, i. 6, 13;
  viii. 15, 3, 17, 1; ix. 1, 2.

Footnote 2497:

  Middleton, _op. cit_. ii. p. 121, fig. 65.

Footnote 2498:

  Cf. Buckman and Newmarch, _Roman Art in Cirencester_, p. 49 ff.

Footnote 2499:

  Vitr. vii. 1, 4; Pliny, _H.N._ xxxvi. 184; Stat. _Silv._ i. 3, 54.

Footnote 2500:

  _Archaeologia_, xxvi. pl. 44, p. 370.

Footnote 2501:

  Roach-Smith, _Ill. Rom. Lond._ p. 113.

Footnote 2502:

  _C.I.L._ vii. 1223-24.

Footnote 2503:

  _Ibid._ 1222 (in B.M.); others from Brecon and Abergavenny.

Footnote 2504:

  _C.I.L._ vii. 1225.

Footnote 2505:

  The inscribed tiles found in Rome have been collected and published
  by Dressel in vol. xv. (part 1, Nos. 1-2155) of the _Corpus Inscr.
  Lat._ Others are published in the other volumes under the heading
  “Instrumentum Domesticum.” In the succeeding pages Dressel’s account
  has been mainly followed.

Footnote 2506:

  See Hübner, _Exempla Script. Epigr. Lat._ p. lxviii.

Footnote 2507:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 19-29; 209, 1145; 709; 1212; 398.

Footnote 2508:

  _Cat. of Terracottas_, E 148-49.

Footnote 2509:

  _Opus doliare_ is the invariable word for bricks or tiles in Roman
  inscriptions, _figlinum_ being confined to pottery of the finer kind
  (cf. p. 330).

Footnote 2510:

  Cassiodorus, _Variar._ i. 25: cf. ii. 23.

Footnote 2511:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 1668-70.

Footnote 2512:

  Cf. _C.I.L._ xv. p. 204, Nos. 1616, 1627, etc.

Footnote 2513:

  Middleton, _Remains of Ancient Rome_, i. p. 13.

Footnote 2514:

  _C.I.L._ xiv. 4089, 7, from Ostia.

Footnote 2515:

  _Ibid._ 4090, No. 14.

Footnote 2516:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 478 ff.: cf. 683, and _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1840, p. 240.

Footnote 2517:

  _Ibid._ 677-82.

Footnote 2518:

  _Ibid._ 389.

Footnote 2519:

  B.M. _Cat. of Terracottas_, E 150.

Footnote 2520:

  _E.g._ Wilmanns, _Exempla Inscr. Lat._ 2793_a_.

Footnote 2521:

  See Blanchet,  _Mélanges Gallo-romaines_, ii. (1902), p. 110.

Footnote 2522:

  See Steiner, _Cod. Inscr. Rom. Danubii et Rheni_, i. p. 85, No. 190,
  ii. p. 187, No. 1231.

Footnote 2523:

  _C.I.L._ vii. 1255, 1257.

Footnote 2524:

  _Ibid._ 1242.

Footnote 2525:

  Cf. _C.I.L._ xv. p. 274.

Footnote 2526:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 1097-1101, and see p. 275.

Footnote 2527:

  Marini, _Iscriz. ant. doliari_, 1418.

Footnote 2528:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 1539.

Footnote 2529:

  _Ibid._ 1540, 1542.

Footnote 2530:

  _Ibid._ 1668-70.

Footnote 2531:

  Steiner, _op. cit._ i. p. 252, No. 541 (from Mainz); also _Bonner
  Jahrbücher_, ii. p. 92.

Footnote 2532:

  Steiner, i. p. 75, No. 171; ii. p. 248, No. 1373.

Footnote 2533:

  _C.I.L._ iii. p. 962; _Wiener Sitzungsberichte_, xiv. (1855), p. 133.

Footnote 2534:

  _C.I.L._ _ibid._

Footnote 2535:

  Steiner, ii. p. 254, No. 1391.

Footnote 2536:

  Now in Pesth Museum (_C.I.L._ _ibid._).

Footnote 2537:

  _C.I.L._ vii. 1260.

Footnote 2538:

  _Ibid._ 1259; _Victoria County Hist. of Hants_, i. p. 282 (_q.v._ for
  other examples).

Footnote 2539:

  _Cat._ p. 73, No. 56; _Ephem. Epigr._ vii. (1892), p. 344.

Footnote 2540:

  _C.I.L._ ii. 4967, 31: cf. _Victoria County Hist. of Hants_, i. p.
  275.

Footnote 2541:

  _E.g._ B.M. E 149: see p. 354.

Footnote 2542:

  See Dressel in _C.I.L._ xv. p. 10.

Footnote 2543:

  Steiner, _Cod. Inscr. Rom. Danub. et Rheni_, ii. p. 253, No. 1389.

Footnote 2544:

  _C.I.L._ xv. p. 5 ff. For epigraphical and grammatical peculiarities
  see _ibid._ p. 7. On p. 204 is given a list of emperors whose names
  are found on the tiles, from Trajan to Septimius Severus.

Footnote 2545:

  See for these abbreviations and expressions _C.I.L._ xv. p. 387.

Footnote 2546:

  B.M. E 152.

Footnote 2547:

  _C.I.L._ xiv. 4089, 1.

Footnote 2548:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 3, 4, xiv. 4089, 4.

Footnote 2549:

  _Cat._ p. 73, Nos. 60-3.

Footnote 2550:

  _C.I.L._ vii. 1235; Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ i. p. 143: see
  also _Journ. Brit. Arch. Assoc._ xxxix. p. 389.

Footnote 2551:

  Numerous examples of these legionary stamps will be found in
  Steiner’s _Codex Inscr. Rom. Danubii et Rheni_ (1851); they will
  presumably be republished in the forthcoming part of vol. xiii. of
  the Latin _Corpus_.

Footnote 2552:

  _C.I.L._ xiv. 4090, 2.

Footnote 2553:

  _C.I.L._ vii. 1225.

Footnote 2554:

  See generally _C.I.L._ iii. Suppl. 1, for Dacia, Pannonia, and the
  East; for Germany, Steiner, _op. cit. passim_, and _Bonner
  Jahrbücher_, index to vols. 1-60.

Footnote 2555:

  _C.I.L._ vii. 1228.

Footnote 2556:

  _Ibid._ 1231: see Roach-Smith, _Ill. Rom. London_, p. 116.

Footnote 2557:

  Wilmanns, _Exempla_, 2804.

Footnote 2558:

  _C.I.L._ iii. 3756.

Footnote 2559:

  Steiner, ii. p. 250, No. 1379.

Footnote 2560:

  Marini, _Iscriz. ant. doliari_, No. 1382; Wilmanns, _Exempla_, 2805
  _b_.

Footnote 2561:

  _C.I.L._ vii. 1226; Roach-Smith, _Ill. Rom. London_, p. 112;
  Blanchet, _Mélanges Gallo-romaines_, ii. p. 110.

Footnote 2562:

  Vitr. iv. 6.

Footnote 2563:

  Campana, _Ant. opere in plastica_, p. 31.

Footnote 2564:

  _S.v._ Antefixa or Impluvium.

Footnote 2565:

  _Ep. ad Att._ i. 10.

Footnote 2566:

  B.M. D 543, 576, 594; _Röm. Mitth._ 1886, p. 173; _Notizie degli
  Scavi_, 1901, p. 188.

Footnote 2567:

  _Cat._ 501-660. It has been stated, but on what authority is unknown,
  that they were found in a well near the Porta Latina, together with a
  series of statues discussed below (p. 373).

Footnote 2568:

  A collective publication of these reliefs is being prepared by the
  German Archaeological Institute.

Footnote 2569:

  See Helbig’s _Führer_^2, ii. pp. 272, 408 ff.

Footnote 2570:

  Cf. Pliny, _H.N._ xxxvi. 189: Agrippa in thermis figulinum opus
  encausto pinxit: see also Vol. I. p. 119.

Footnote 2571:

  See _B.M. Cat. of Terracottas_, p. xvii.

Footnote 2572:

  Von Rohden, _Terracotten von Pompeii_, pl. 20: see also pls. 21, 23.

Footnote 2573:

  D 626-27: cf. _Jahreshefte_, 1903, p. 25.

Footnote 2574:

  _Ant. opere in plastica_, pl. 14.

Footnote 2575:

  Hauser, _Neuattische Reliefs_, pp. 111, 128.

Footnote 2576:

  B.M. D 520, 527; Campana, pls. 47-8.

Footnote 2577:

  B.M. D 583-85; Campana, pls. 61, 62: cf. the Arretine krater, Fig.
  219, p. 488.

Footnote 2578:

  B.M. D 561; Campana, pls. 27, 41.

Footnote 2579:

  B.M. D 501; Campana, pls. 1-2.

Footnote 2580:

  Campana, pl. 3.

Footnote 2581:

  B.M. D 505; Campana, pl. 18.

Footnote 2582:

  B.M. D 507; Campana, pl. 19.

Footnote 2583:

  B.M. D 508-9; Campana, pl. 10.

Footnote 2584:

  B.M. D 510-24; Campana, pls. 9-10, 15, 53, 88, 102-3.

Footnote 2585:

  Helbig 1459 = Overbeck, _Kunstmythol. Atlas_, pl. 16, 8.

Footnote 2586:

  Campana, pls. 7-8, 13, 16-7.

Footnote 2587:

  B.M. D 531: cf. Campana, pls. 29-30.

Footnote 2588:

  B.M. D 525; Campana, pl. 50: see _J.H.S._ xxiii. p. 295.

Footnote 2589:

  See for these B.M. D 526, 534-52.

Footnote 2590:

  Campana, pls. 26, 31, 35-7, 43-6.

Footnote 2591:

  B.M. D 553-60.

Footnote 2592:

  B.M. D 569-79: cf. _J.H.S._ vii. p. 284.

Footnote 2593:

  B.M. D 566-68; Campana, pls. 86 ff.

Footnote 2594:

  Campana, pl. 55; Helbig, 1179.

Footnote 2595:

  Campana, pls. 20-4; Helbig, 1180.

Footnote 2596:

  B.M. D 592-605; Campana, pls. 56-58, 63-65, 68; Helbig, 1188.

Footnote 2597:

  Otherwise interpreted, Helbig, _Führer_^2, ii. p. 418.

Footnote 2598:

  B.M. D 606-609; Campana, pls. 66-67, 71-73; Helbig, 1190, 1456.

Footnote 2599:

  B.M. D 611-617; Campana, pls. 74-81.

Footnote 2600:

  B.M. D 624-632; Campana, pls. 89-96; Helbig, 1466; and see
  _Jahreshefte_, 1903, p. 16 ff.

Footnote 2601:

  B.M. D 633-638; Campana, pls. 114, 115.

Footnote 2602:

  Plutarch, _Vit. Num._ viii. 8.

Footnote 2603:

  _Sat._ xi. 116.

Footnote 2604:

  iv. (v.), 1, 5.

Footnote 2605:

  _H.N._ xxxiv. 34; and see xxxv. 158.

Footnote 2606:

  iii. 2 (3), 5.

Footnote 2607:

  _De Div._ i. 10, 16.

Footnote 2608:

  xxvi. 23.

Footnote 2609:

  Ovid, _Fast._ i. 202; Seneca, _Cons. ad Helv._ 10, 7: cf. _Ep._ 31
  (iv. 2, 11).

Footnote 2610:

  Pliny, _H.N._ xxxv. 159; Plut. _Vit. Num._ 17.

Footnote 2611:

  Pliny, _H.N._ xxxv. 154.

Footnote 2612:

  _Ibid._ 155.

Footnote 2613:

  _Ibid._ 156.

Footnote 2614:

  Livy, xxxi. 4.

Footnote 2615:

  Cf. Pliny, _H.N._ xxxv. 155.

Footnote 2616:

  Helbig, _Führer_, ii. p. 272, No. 1177.

Footnote 2617:

  _Cat._ D 439.

Footnote 2618:

  Froehner’s _Cat._ No. 249.

Footnote 2619:

  B.M. _Cat. of Terracottas_, D 431-437, and see _ibid._ p. xiii; also
  Smith, _Nollekens and his Times_, i. p. 10.

Footnote 2620:

  Pottier, _Statuettes de Terre Cuit_, p. 233.

Footnote 2621:

  Von Rohden, _Terracotten von Pompeii_, pl. 29, p. 18, 21; Pottier,
  _op. cit._ p. 230.

Footnote 2622:

  Von Rohden, pl. 32.

Footnote 2623:

  _Ibid._ pls. 34-35.

Footnote 2624:

  _Ibid._ pl. 19, fig. 2.

Footnote 2625:

  _Ibid._ pl. 25: cf. pl. 26.

Footnote 2626:

  _Ibid._ pl. 24, 2.

Footnote 2627:

  _H.N._ xxxv. 153.

Footnote 2628:

  _Ibid._ 156.

Footnote 2629:

  _Ibid._ 155: see also on this subject Wickhoff, _Roman Art_, English
  edn., p. 42; Blümner, _Technologie_, iii. p. 190; Gardner, _Handbook
  of Gk. Sculpture_, p. 33.

Footnote 2630:

  Cf. Von Rohden, _op. cit._ p. 24.

Footnote 2631:

  _Ibid._: cf. also pls. 35-36, 41, 47. For the subject of the feeding
  of the prisoner cf. _Classical Review_, 1901, p. 93.

Footnote 2632:

  _Ibid._ pl. 42, pp. 25, 53.

Footnote 2633:

  xiv. 178.

Footnote 2634:

  _Ibid._ 176, 182.

Footnote 2635:

  _Ibid._ 171.

Footnote 2636:

  ii. 70: cf. Lactant, _Div. Inst._ ii. 4.

Footnote 2637:

  iii. 15.

Footnote 2638:

  Lampridius, _Vit._ 25.

Footnote 2639:

  i. 10, 23 and 11, 46: cf. Warde Fowler, _Roman Festivals_, p. 272.

Footnote 2640:

  _De fer. rom._ 31 (Teubner edn. p. 105); but see Marquardt,
  _Staatsverwaltung_, iii. p. 563.

Footnote 2641:

  _Sat._ i. 10, 23.

Footnote 2642:

  Cf. the ceremony of the Argei on the Ides of May (Preller-Jordan,
  _Röm. Mythol._ ii. p. 135).

Footnote 2643:

  _Sat._ i. 11, 46-49: cf. Preller-Jordan, _loc. cit._

Footnote 2644:

  _Sat._ i. 11, 1.

Footnote 2645:

  Cf. Seneca, _Ep._ 12 (i. 12, 3), and other references given by
  Blümner, _Technol._ ii. p. 125.

Footnote 2646:

  Spartianus, _Vit. Hadriani_, 17.

Footnote 2647:

  _Id. Vit. Carac._ 1.

Footnote 2648:

  Orelli, _Inscr. Lat._ 4279, 4191.

Footnote 2649:

  Suet. _Claud._ 16, _Nero_ 28; Gellius, ii. 3, 5, v. 4, 1.

Footnote 2650:

  Dio Cass. lix. 6; Gell. ii. 3, 5.

Footnote 2651:

  Tert. _Apol._ 12 and _ad Nat._ i. 12; the Greek word is ???aß??: see
  Vol. I. p. 111.

Footnote 2652:

  iv. 15.

Footnote 2653:

  Von Rohden, pls. 36-45.

Footnote 2654:

  _Ibid._ p. 21, fig. 14.

Footnote 2655:

  _Op. cit._ p. 22: see also Pottier, _Statuettes de Terre Cuite_, p.
  235.

Footnote 2656:

  Fernique, _Praeneste_, pp. 166, 211 ff.

Footnote 2657:

  Paris, _Élatée_, p. 156.

Footnote 2658:

  _Röm. Mitth._ 1886, p. 176: cf. _Archaeologia_, 1. pls. 8, 9.

Footnote 2659:

  Wright, _Celt, Roman, and Saxon_^4, p. 281.

Footnote 2660:

  _Victoria County Hist. of Norfolk_, p. 291.

Footnote 2661:

  _Cat._ p. 71, Nos. 39, 46; p. 70, No. 30.

Footnote 2662:

  _Handbook of British Pottery_, 1893, p. 77.

Footnote 2663:

  _Figurines en Argile_ (1859): see for abstracts Roach-Smith in
  _Collect. Antiq._ vi. p. 48 ff., and Pottier, _Statuettes de Terre
  Cuite_, p. 236.

Footnote 2664:

  _Rev. Arch._ xi. (1888), p. 145 ff.

Footnote 2665:

  _Mémoires de la Soc. Nat. des Antiquaires de France_, li. (1891), p.
  65 ff., with a supplement in vol. lx. (1901), p. 189 ff.

Footnote 2666:

  _Op. cit._ lx. p. 197.

Footnote 2667:

  _Cat. of Terracottas_, E 48-49: cf. Tudot, pl. 9, and Roach-Smith,
  _Ill. Rom. Lond._ p. 109.

Footnote 2668:

  See the lists given by Tudot (p. 64) and Blanchet (p. 83).

Footnote 2669:

  Pl. 3: other examples in pls. 4-14.

Footnote 2670:

  See Chapter XXIII. and Pottier, _Statuettes de Terre Cuite_, p. 241.

Footnote 2671:

  See the tables given by Blanchet, p. 115.

Footnote 2672:

  Blanchet, p. 89. For AVOT see also p. 384.

Footnote 2673:

  For a complete list of Gaulish sites on which statuettes were made,
  see Blanchet, _Mélanges Gallo-romaines_, ii. (1902), p. 90 ff.

Footnote 2674:

  _Op. cit._ lx. p. 204.

Footnote 2675:

  _Op. cit._ lx. pp. 206, 234.

Footnote 2676:

  _Rev. Arch._ xv. (1890), p. 423 (from Dijon); for a list, see
  Blanchet, _op. cit._ li. p. 96.

Footnote 2677:

  Orelli, _Inscr. Lat._ 2776.

Footnote 2678:

  Blanchet, _op. cit._ plate, fig. 1; _Rev. Arch._ xi. (1888), p. 155,
  pl. 6.

Footnote 2679:

  Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ vi. p. 228 ff., pls. 46-47.

Footnote 2680:

  _Guildhall Mus. Cat._ p. 71, No. 32. See also for Britain generally,
  _Cumbd. and Westmd. Ant. Soc. Trans._ xv. p. 505.

Footnote 2681:

  Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ vii. p. 63; _Ill. Rom. Lond._ p 109.

Footnote 2682:

  _Op. cit._ p. 106 ff.

Footnote 2683:

  See Blanchet, p. 120 ff.

Footnote 2684:

  _Bell. Gall._ vi. 17.

Footnote 2685:

  Cf. Heuzey, _Figurines ant. du Louvre_, pls. 2-4.

Footnote 2686:

  For a good example at Rouen see Blanchet, p. 167.

Footnote 2687:

  Cf. _B.M. Cat.  of Terracottas_, D 229 ff.

Footnote 2688:

  See Roscher, _s.v._ Fecunditas.

Footnote 2689:

  _Op. cit._ lx. p. 198.

Footnote 2690:

  See p. 489.

Footnote 2691:

  Cf. Lafaye, _Culte des divinités d’Alexandrie_, p. 162 ff.

Footnote 2692:

  See Blanchet, _op. cit._ p. 143 ff.

Footnote 2693:

  See Von Rohden, _Terracotten von Pompeii_, pl. 27, p. 5.

Footnote 2694:

  _Ibid._ pl. 26.

Footnote 2695:

  Daremberg and Saglio, _s.v._ Lucerna, fig. 4607: see below, p. 396.

Footnote 2696:

  _Re Rust._ iii. 15.

Footnote 2697:

  ix. 6.

Footnote 2698:

  _Antr. Nymph._ 3, 14 ff. (Teubner).

Footnote 2699:

  _Cat. of Terracottas_, E 123-124.

Footnote 2700:

  See _Journ. Brit. Arch. Assoc._ xxxii. p. 65.

Footnote 2701:

  See also Daremberg and Saglio, _s.v._ Forma, fig. 3186.

Footnote 2702:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1901, p. 161 ff.: see also Daremberg and Saglio, _s.v._
  Loculus.

Footnote 2703:

  _Op. cit._ p. 167. Cf. also for the form the T?sa???? at Olympia.

Footnote 2704:

  _Op. cit._ p. 166; Tudot, _Figurines_, pl. 48; Daremberg and Saglio,
  _s.v._ Loculus, fig. 4512.

Footnote 2705:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1901, p. 168.

Footnote 2706:

  _Ibid._ p. 170.

Footnote 2707:

  Cf. also Hor. _Sat._ ii. 6, 10.

Footnote 2708:

  Jahrbuch, _loc. cit._

Footnote 2709:

  _Miscellanies_, p. 26.

Footnote 2710:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1901, p. 178 = _C.I.L._ xv. 6068.

Footnote 2711:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1901, p. 179; fig. 200.

Footnote 2712:

  See below, p. 428, and _C.I.L._, xv. 6502, 6608; also B.M. Nos. 329,
  554.

Footnote 2713:

  _Op. cit._ p. 183 ff.

Footnote 2714:

  B.M. 488, 490; _C.I.L._ xv. 6610.

Footnote 2715:

  _Jahrbuch_, 1901, p. 185; _C.I.L._ xv. 6073: cf. for the signature on
  lamps, _ibid._ 6274, and B.M. 477.

Footnote 2716:

  See on this subject throughout Babelon, _Traité des monnaies grecques
  et romaines_, i. p. 955 (with full bibliography).

Footnote 2717:

  _Numism. Journal_, ii. pp. 58, 195.

Footnote 2718:

  Hill, _Greek and Roman Coins_, p. 157; _Victoria County History,
  Northants_, i. p. 198.

Footnote 2719:

  See Daremberg and Saglio, ii. _s.v._ Forma, for an account of the
  process.

Footnote 2720:

  Daremberg and Saglio, _loc. cit._, fig. 3187.




                              CHAPTER XX
                              _ROMAN LAMPS_

    Introduction of lamps at Rome—Sites where found—Principal
      parts of lamps—Purposes for which used—Superstitious and
      other uses—Chronological account of forms—Technical
      processes—Subjects—Deities—Mythological and literary
      subjects—_Genre_ subjects and animals—Inscriptions on
      lamps—Names of potters and their distribution—Centres of
      manufacture.

                              BIBLIOGRAPHY

    Bartoli, _Le antichi lucerne sepolcrali_; _Antichità di Ercolano_,
      vol. viii.; Kenner, _Die antiken Thonlampen des k.-k. Münz- und
      Antiken-Cabinetes zu Wien_, 1858; Wieseler in _Göttinger
      Nachrichten_, 1870 (Kestnersche Sammlung); La Blanchère and
      Gauckler, _Cat. du Musée Alaoui_, 1897; Daremberg and Saglio,
      _Dict. des Antiqs_, iii. art. LUCERNA (an admirable résumé by
      Toutain); Fink in _Sitzungsber. d. Münchener Akad. d. Wissensch._
      1900, p. 685 ff.; _C.I.L._, _passim_, _s.v._ Instrumentum
      Domesticum, but above all vol. xv. pt. 2, p. 782 ff. (Dressel).


Lamps (_lucernae_) were often made of terracotta, and these are in many
ways of special interest. Originally they appear to have been called
_lychnus_, from the Greek ??????, and this word is used by Ennius,
Lucilius, Lucretius, and Virgil.[2721] Varro[2722] says that the word
_lucerna_, from _lux_, was invented when the want of a Latin word was
felt, and that previously _candelae_ or torches had been alone in use,
there being no oil known in Italy suitable for this purpose. Even in
Greece lamps were comparatively rare all through the best period (cf.
Vol. I. p. 106). The oldest lamps found in Rome date from the third
century B.C., and are thought to be of Campanian fabric; they were
found on the Esquiline, and are of quite different character from the
ordinary Roman types.[2723] It would appear, therefore, that originally
the Romans borrowed lamps from Southern Italy. By the time of the
Empire their use had become general, and they are found everywhere. The
increase in their manufacture was mainly due to growing taste in house
decoration, and also to use in funeral ceremonies and for public
purposes, such as illumination. Of the latter use in imperial times
there is plenty of evidence (see below, p. 396).

The sites on which Roman lamps have been found are far too numerous to
discuss in detail, as they embrace every part of the Roman Empire. In
Rome and the neighbourhood they are especially plentiful, as is implied
by the fact that a large portion of the fifteenth volume of the Latin
_Corpus Inscriptionum_ is devoted to those with potters’ stamps alone.
They are found in all parts of Italy, in Gaul, Germany, Britain, Spain,
North Africa, Sicily, Greece, Egypt, Cyprus, and Asia Minor. The
question of centres of manufacture is discussed elsewhere (p. 427) in
connection with the potters’ stamps; but it may be noted that those
found on Greek soil are often of a distinct character from those of
Western Europe, and the stamps on them form a distinct group, being
usually in Greek letters (cf. Vol. I. p. 108). Of provincial sites,
Knidos, Ephesos, Carthage, and some of the German towns have proved
particularly rich in this respect. Large numbers have been found in
London, mostly of the later types, some perhaps of local fabric, and
those in the Romano-British collection of the British Museum are nearly
all from that city or from Colchester. Not the least remarkable fact of
their wide distribution is the occurrence in the most widely separated
regions of the same potter’s stamps and the same subjects, implying in
the former case extensive export from one centre, in the latter
systematic commercial intercourse between the potters of different
districts.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The principal parts of a Roman lamp[2724] are: (1) the reservoir or
body, which contained the oil (_infundibulum_); (2) the flat circular
top, known as the _discus_, sometimes with an ornamented rim (_margo_);
(3) the nozzle, with a hole for the insertion of the wick
(_rostrum_,[2725] _nasus_, myxus[2726]; the wick was called
_ellychnium_); (4) the handle (_ansa_, _manubrium_), which was not
indispensable. In the _discus_ was a filling-hole for pouring in the
oil, sometimes protected by a cover or stopper, and sometimes a second
smaller hole, the purpose of which has been disputed (see p. 406). The
number of nozzles was not limited, though there is usually only one; a
lamp with two is known as _bilychnis_[2727]; one with several, as
_polymyxus_. Martial in one of his epigrams says: “Though I illuminate
whole banquets with my flame, and have so many nozzles (_myxos_), I am
known as a single lamp.”[2728] The wicks were made of a plant known as
_verbascum_ f??µ?? or _thryallis_,[2729] but tow, papyrus, and sulphur
were also employed[2730]; the oil was a vegetable oil of some kind.
Sometimes the lamps were provided with a sort of snuffers or tweezers
for extracting and trimming the wick,[2731] as described in a passage
in the _Moretum_ (10 ff.), which speaks of drawing out the wick of a
dying lamp with a needle:

             Admovet his pronam submissa fronte lucernam,
             Et producit acu stuppas humore carentes
             Excitat et crebris languentem flatibus ignem.

The purposes for which lamps were used by the Romans were various, but
fall under three main heads: (1) for purposes of illumination in
private houses, in public buildings, or on occasions of rejoicing; (2)
as offerings in temples; (3) as funerary furniture.

In small houses they were placed either in niches in the walls or on
brackets, or were suspended by chains, or even in some cases hung by
the handle from a nail. An Etruscan terracotta lamp bears evidence of
having been suspended in the last-named manner,[2732] but there is no
doubt that this was more usual with lamps of bronze, there being few in
terracotta which would have admitted of such a use. Sometimes the lamps
were made resting on a kind of support, as is the case with two in the
British Museum, and others found in Africa.[2733] On the support a
figure of a deity was usually modelled in relief.[2734] Combinations of
a lamp and altar are not uncommon, especially at Rome and Naples.[2735]
There are numerous examples from Pompeii and Herculaneum illustrating
their use in private life, although lamps of clay are confined to the
poorer houses or to domestic service. For their use in the bedchamber
at night evidence is afforded by Martial and other writers.[2736] A
rough classification of the existing terracotta lamps might be made by
dividing them into—(1) those with knobs for hanging, (2) those with
handles for carrying, (3) those without handles for placing on tables
or brackets.

Many passages in Latin writers afford evidence for the use of lamps in
processions or for illuminations at times of public rejoicings, such as
triumphs. They were thus used by Cleopatra, at the triumph of Julius
Caesar, at the return of Nero, and so on.[2737] Caligula had theatrical
representations performed by lamp-light at night, and Domitian arranged
hunts and gladiatoral combats _ad lychnuchos_.[2738] Severus Alexander
lighted up the baths with oil-lamps,[2739] and Tertullian speaks of
assisting in political triumphs by defrauding the day with the light of
lamps.[2740] Juvenal also speaks of their use in illuminations.[2741]
Many lamps, especially those with subjects relating to the circus or
games, are inscribed with the word SAECVL(_ares_), and it is possible
that they were used in connection with the Ludi Saeculares, at which
illuminations took place. But lamps with this inscription are not
exclusively ornamented with such subjects.[2742]

Lamps were used for burning in temples, and were also the subject of
votive offerings to the gods, in Greece as well as in Italy. One found
at Oenoanda in Lycia was offered “to the most high God”[2743]; and
those which Sir Charles Newton found in such large numbers at Knidos
(Vol. I. p. 108) were also votive offerings in the temenos of Demeter.
Votive lamps are recorded from Selinus,[2744] and at Carthage numbers
were found round the altar of Saturnus Balcaranensis.[2745] To their
use in the worship of Isis, as referred to by Apuleius, we allude below.

Nearly all lamps have been found in tombs, the custom of placing them
there being one of Asiatic, not of Greek, origin; it became quite
general under the Roman dominion. Christian lamps are found in the
catacombs, but not in cemeteries, showing that the practice came to be
regarded as pagan. At Avisford in Sussex they were found placed in open
bowls with handles, on brackets along the side of a tomb.[2746] The
Roman lamps found in tombs were placed there, like the Greek vases and
the later glass, for the use of the dead, sometimes, though not
necessarily, with the idea of their burning perpetually.[2747] An
inscription on a sepulchral _cippus_ in the British Museum[2748]
directs the heirs of the deceased to place a lighted lamp in his tomb
on the Kalends, Nones, and Ides of each month, and similarly L. Granius
Pudens of the seventh cohort requests that his family should place oil
in a lamp on his birthday.[2749] Another inscription in an elegiac
couplet says: “Whosoever places a lighted lamp in this tomb, may golden
earth cover his ashes.”[2750] A fourth inscription directs the daily
offering of a lamp at the public expense to the _manes_ of a deceased
person.[2751] In the story of the matron of Ephesus, told by Petronius,
a servant-maid is described as replenishing the lamp in a tomb as often
as was required.[2752] Two lamps in the Athens Museum have the subject
of a bear, and over it the inscription F???C, “Fear”; being found in
tombs, they must have been placed there with some significance, and as,
on the evidence of a Cilician inscription, Phobos was regarded as a
guardian of tombs who frightened off robbers and other evilly-disposed
persons, it may be that the terrible bear was placed on the lamp as a
symbol of this protector of the dead.[2753]

Other superstitious uses of lamps, not connected with the tomb, were
not uncommon. Omens were drawn from the way in which the flame
burned,[2754] and Chrysostom describes a method of naming children by
giving names to lamps, which were then lighted, and the name of the
child was taken from that last extinguished.[2755]

There are also a few other exceptional uses of lamps, as for instance
when they were given as _strenae_, or New Year’s presents. Such lamps
usually have a figure of Victory holding a shield, on which are the
words ANNVM NOVVM FAVSTVM FELICEM, “A happy and prosperous New
Year!”[2756] In the field are heads of Janus, or cakes, wreaths, and
other objects also probably intended for presents. These all appear to
date from the beginning of the first century after Christ.[2757] A lamp
of the same class in the Guildhall Museum has on the shield FIILICTII,
_Felic(i)t(as)_.[2758] It is interesting to note that the New Year
lamps are found in tombs[2759]; they may, of course, have been
preserved and buried as mementoes; but at the same time, it is not
essential that the subject on a lamp should have any relation to its
purpose, as we have seen in the case of those inscribed
_Saeculares_.[2760] The Helioserapis lamp (see p. 403) and those with
Phobos as a bear may, indeed, be instances to the contrary, but on the
whole it would seem that the same rule would apply as in the case of
the terracottas (see Vol. I. p. 122).

[Illustration: FIG. 202. LAMP FROM THE ESQUILINE.]

The earliest Roman lamps are of rude shape, undecorated, with a long
projecting nozzle and circular reservoir; they are not always provided
with handles, but are often covered with black glaze, like the Greek
examples. Lamps of this type are found on the Esquiline, in North
Africa, as at Carthage, and in Sicily.[2761] One of the Esquiline
examples, dating from the second century, has the engraved inscription
VEVCADIA (Fig. 202).[2762] Like the Greek lamps, these are made on the
wheel (t?????at??), not, as later ones, in a mould. Names in _graffito_
seem to imply a reference to the person in whose tomb the lamp was
found, and such formulae as AVE, NOLI ME TANGERE, NII ATTIGAS NON SVM
TVA M · SVM, PONE FVR (“Drop it, thief!”), which occur on the Esquiline
lamps, also clearly refer to funeral usage.[2763]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 203.
  “DELPHINI-
  FORM” LAMP.
]

In the first century B.C. the lamps, still mostly of black ware, and
devoid of subjects, are distinguished by the straight-ended,
concave-sided nozzle 20[26]nozzle with a shallow groove leading to the
centre, small grooved ring-handle, and sometimes a lateral projection
like a fin, from which some varieties are known as “delphiniform” (Fig.
203).[2764] These are often found in North Africa, but are also
imported into Italy, and some have Greek stamps. The top is sometimes
covered with globules, or with patterns of vine and ivy, and in the
later examples figure-subjects are introduced.[2765] The earlier ones
have large single letters or monograms underneath for potters’ marks;
the later, the name of the potter or superintendent of the pottery.

[Illustration: FIG. 204. LAMP WITH VOLUTE-NOZZLE; FIRST CENTURY B.C.]

We now come to the Roman lamps of the Imperial period, of which such
large numbers exist in museums all over Europe and the basin of the
Mediterranean. They have not as yet been very systematically studied
and classified; but so far as the subject has been treated at all,
those who have investigated the development of the forms are fairly
unanimous in their general conclusions.[2766] The last writer on the
subject, Herr Fink, of Munich, has advanced a step further, and by
comparison of forms with potters’ signatures has arrived at some
interesting results, which we need not hesitate to accept in the
main.[2767] He adopted as the basis of his classification the form of
the nozzle in each case, for the obvious reason that it is more
essential to the character of a lamp than the handle; if the latter is
removed, the form is in no way affected, as it would be by the absence
of the nozzle.

[Illustration: FIG. 205. LAMP WITH POINTED VOLUTE-NOZZLE; FIRST CENTURY
B.C.]

Following, then, on the lines of Fink and the other writers, we may
establish—apart from abnormal forms and lamps modelled in the shape of
figures—four main classes, which are sufficient to include practically
all the lamps with which we have to deal. They may be summarised as
follows:

(1) Lamps with rounded nozzle or nozzles, flanked on each side by a
kind of double volute, as in Fig. 204 and B.M. 167-352. The usual
number of nozzles is one, but two are not infrequently found. These
belong to the first century B.C., and, being convenient forms for a
decorated top, are ornamented with all kinds of subjects[2768]; the
handle when present is often ornamented as in the cut.

(2) Lamps of the same type as the last, except that the nozzle ends in
an obtuse-angled termination, as Fig. 205 and B.M. 94-166. It is a form
not adapted for more than one nozzle, and usually has no handle.[2769]

[Illustration: FIG. 206. LAMP WITH GROOVED NOZZLE (NORTH ITALY TYPE);
FIRST CENTURY AFTER CHRIST.]

(3) A small but distinct class, almost devoid of figured decoration
(Fig. 206 and B.M. 379-392), but usually with a potter’s name
underneath; the form is elegant, and probably copied from bronze.[2770]
The chief feature is the sunk centre, in which is usually placed a
Bacchic or comic mask; round it runs a raised rim, through which a
shallow groove passes to the somewhat elongated nozzle. This dates from
the first century of the Empire or earlier, some being found with coins
of Augustus, others at Pompeii; these lamps are of red clay, unglazed,
and have no handle. On the sides are projecting knobs, either
concealing the joins of the moulds (see p. 405), or for the attachment
of chains. The names of the makers, Strobilus, Communis, Fortis, etc.,
are in good raised letters, impressed in the mould (see Fig. 210). They
are found in all parts, but rarely south of Rome; most of them are from
Gallia Cispadana,[2771] and they may have been made at Mutina.

[Illustration: FIG. 207. LAMP WITH SMALL PLAIN NOZZLE; SECOND CENTURY
AFTER CHRIST.]

(4) In this class (Fig. 207 and B.M. 393-567) the nozzle is small, and
hardly projects beyond the rim of the lamp; it is semicircular or
heart-shaped in form, and sometimes has an incised line or circles at
the base. Fig. 208 represents a late development with the heart-shaped
nozzle, in which the design is always surrounded by a wreath or
ornamental pattern. Many of these lamps, especially those found in
Greece (see Vol. I. p. 108), have no handle; there is also a somewhat
late variety, described on the same page, which is confined to Greece
and marked by potters’ signatures in Greek letters (B.M. 604-629).
These lamps date from the time of Trajan onwards; the signatures are
usually abbreviated, and are stamped hollow, or sometimes scratched in
the wet clay; raised letters are rare. The subjects are very varied.

[Illustration: FIG. 208. THIRD-CENTURY TYPE OF LAMP.]

Some of the larger lamps in the first class, especially those with more
than one nozzle, have a flat vertical projection attached to the top of
the handle, triangular in form or crescent-shaped (as in Fig. 204), and
this is often ornamented with figures in relief, either whole subjects
or busts of deities, or such simple motives as a pair of dolphins, a
leaf, or a palmette. The figure-subjects are often quasi-Egyptian, such
as Harpocrates and Safekh on a British Museum example (No. 337 = Plate
LXIII. fig. 3), or a _lectisternium_ of Sarapis, Isis, Helios, and
Selene.[2772] In a few cases this projection is replaced by a bust or
even a seated figure of Sarapis enthroned in a niche. But in most cases
the handle, when present, is of a simple form, either a ring with
shallow parallel grooves or a solid projecting piece through which a
hole is pierced.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                             PLATE LXIII

[Illustration:

  ROMAN LAMPS OF VARIOUS FORMS (FIRST CENT. B.C.)
  (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

         ------------------------------------------------------

Lamps of terracotta often assume, like those in bronze,[2773] a more
ornamental form, being modelled partly or wholly in the form of
figures, heads, animals, and so on. In some cases the upper part or
_discus_ only is modelled, assuming the form of a mask—Satyric,
theatrical, or grotesque.[2774] Among the entire-figures which form
lamps occur Artemis,[2775] Eros,[2776] Victory slaying a bull,[2777]
and various animals; more common are heads of Zeus Ammon,[2778] Pan,
Seilenos,[2779] negroes,[2780] and animals such as oxen, birds, snails,
frogs, or tortoises.[2781] A favourite shape is a lamp in the form of a
foot or a pair of feet, shod in sandals or boots,[2782] and there are
two lamps in the British Museum, one of enamelled ware, in the form of
a gladiator’s helmet[2783]; others form fruit, pine-cones or
crescents.[2784] In the lamps which are modelled in the form of a head,
the chin usually forms the nozzle, and the orifice for filling is on
the forehead; in those in the shape of a foot the nozzle is formed by
the great toe. Occasionally lamps are found in the form of a ship,
recalling that which, according to Apuleius, was used in the worship of
Isis: a golden boat or cup (_cymbium_, see Vol. I. p. 186), which shone
with a clear light and sent forth a long flame.[2785] An interesting
commentary on this use of lamps is formed by a remarkable example in
the British Museum (Plate LXIII. fig. 1),[2786] which is not only in
the shape of a boat, but is decorated with subjects referring to the
pseudo-Egyptian cults characteristic of Rome in the late republican and
early imperial period. This lamp, which is no less than twenty inches
long and has numerous holes for wicks along the sides, was dredged up
from the sea at Pozzuoli, where it may originally have been in the
temple of Isis and Sarapis. On it is the inscription [???????],
signifying “a prosperous voyage,” perhaps as a prayer on behalf of the
donor, and underneath are the words [???? ?? ???] [????S??????],
“Receive me, Helioserapis,” by which the name of the vessel may be
intended.

Most lamps had only one wick, but the light which they afforded must
have been feeble, and consequently the number was often increased. When
the number is not large, or when the body is circular (as in Plate
LXIII. fig. 4), they project beyond the rim of the lamp, as in Class I.
already described, but the lamps which have a large number are usually
boat-shaped or rectangular in form (see Plate LXIII.), and the nozzles
do not then project, but are ranged along the sides, merely indicated
by separate moulding underneath.[2787] Occasionally a conglomeration of
small lamps was made in a row or group, but even in these cases the
illumination given must still have been feeble. The average size of a
lamp is from three to four inches in diameter across the body, the
length depending on the form of the handle and nozzle, but averaging
about an inch over the diameter, and they are mostly about an inch in
height. The top of the lamp is almost always circular in form,
occasionally oval, and rarely rectangular,[2788] and is usually
slightly depressed, being thus shaped to enable any overflow of oil to
run down through the filling-hole. Many Greek lamps, and Roman lamps
from Greek sites, such as Cyprus, are convex above, with a small
moulded disc on the raised centre, in which is the hole. These are
either devoid of decoration, or only have an ornamental pattern or a
frieze of figures on a small scale. Usually the subject is enclosed
within a plain moulded rim, but in the later examples (Class IV.)
especially it is more contracted in extent, and surrounded with a
border of ornament, such as the egg-pattern or a wreath of some kind
(see Fig. 208).

Christian lamps, which hardly come within the scope of this work, vary
very little in form; they have ovoid instead of circular bodies, a
plain rounded nozzle, and a small solid handle, and the design is
always encircled by a band of ornamental pattern or symbolical
devices.[2789]

                  *       *       *       *       *

The clay of which the lamps are made is usually of a red colour, due to
the presence of red ochre (_rubrica_), but it varies both in quality
and tone according to localities; those from Greek sites, such as
Athens and Corfu, are often of a pale buff colour, those from Cyprus a
light reddish brown, and so on. Martial refers to the red clay of
Cumae,[2790] a place where lamps are sometimes found, and those from
Naples are usually of a dull brown or yellow colour. Lamps found in
France and England are often imported from Italy, and therefore of the
ordinary red clay, but those of local manufacture are of a white or
yellowish tone.

[Illustration: FIG. 209. MOULD FOR LAMP FROM CATANIA (BRITISH MUSEUM).]

The earliest undecorated examples are made on the wheel, as are those
from the Esquiline and from Carthage, in which the decoration is only
incised; but subjects in relief required a different technique.
Occasionally they are modelled by hand, but we find that from the first
century B.C. onwards they are almost invariably made in moulds,
modelled from a pattern lamp, in a harder and finer clay than the
pattern.[2791] The mould was divided into two parts, adjusted by
mortices and tenons, which, in the opinion of some writers, explains
the lateral projections visible on certain varieties; the lower part
formed the body of the lamp, the upper the decorated _discus_. The two
parts seem to have been marked by corresponding letters to avoid
errors, and there are two or three lower lamp-moulds in the British
Museum from Ephesos and elsewhere, marked with an A on the under side
for this purpose.[2792] Other examples of moulds have been found in
Greece, Italy, and Africa,[2793] and there are also specimens both for
the upper and lower half in the Guildhall Museum.[2794] They were
either of terracotta or plaster.

The clay was impressed into the mould with the fingers, the figured
decoration being applied by means of models or stamps, as with the
Arretine ware (see below, p. 439), and the ornamental patterns probably
produced with a kind of wheel or running instrument, as in Roman
pottery (p. 441). Signatures in relief were taken from the mould, those
in hollow letters were impressed in the lamp itself from a stamp before
baking. Important potteries must have possessed a large number of
moulds; for instance, at Rome alone ninety-one different subjects are
found on the lamps of one potter (L. Caecilius Saevus), eighty-four on
those of C. Oppius Restitutus, fifty-one on those of Florentius, and
there must of course have been many more now lost. It is clear that the
same types were used by different potters; the models must, therefore,
have been handed about from one to another, each potter merely adding
his own name.

The two portions of the mould were joined while the clay was moist, and
pared with a tool, and the orifice for filling was then pierced. Glaze,
when used, was applied before the baking, for which only a moderate
temperature seems to have been required; this process followed as soon
as the clay was dry. In some lamps a small hole or slit may be
observed, which some have thought to be for the pin with which the wick
was extracted,[2795] but it is more probable that it was for a piece of
wood which held the top and bottom of the mould together until the clay
was united; it was usually covered over before the baking, and may have
taken the place of the knobs already spoken of which occur in other
forms. The lamps were baked in batches, placed closely together or
superimposed,[2796] and it sometimes happens that a number are found
united together which had coalesced firmly in the furnace, as in Sir
Charles Newton’s excavations at Knidos.

=Subjects= are first found on lamps in the second century B.C., though
these are quite of a simple character. Lamps of this date from North
Africa[2797] have such designs as an altar and fruit, a vase, or a
caduceus, a head of an ibis, or a nude incised figure of Tanit; others
have merely a wreath round the centre, and these apparently belong to
the first century B.C.[2798] The number of figures is generally small,
it being contrary to the principles of ancient art to crowd a work with
minute figures and details. The majority of lamps have only one figure,
and few beyond those of exceptional size have more than three. As a
rule the treatment is careless and the figures very indistinct, but the
lamps with Greek signatures (see Vol. 1. p. 108) form a notable
exception.

It may be imagined that the lamp-maker sought to gratify the taste of
his customers by ornamenting his ware with familiar subjects.
Purchasers of terracotta lamps were, as has been noted, generally
persons of inferior condition, and the subjects on the lamps are in
many cases a popularising of well-known myths or even of works of art,
such as the Venus types (p. 410) or the Maenads of the “new-Attic”
reliefs (p. 411). The types of Victory and Fortune are reflections of
statues of the period, and are repeated in many bronze statuettes.
There are also, as we shall see, occasional references to literature.
In Rome the stage exerted little influence, and subjects are rarely
taken from the drama (masks are an exception); but the games of the
circus and gladiatorial contests found a ready market, and form a large
proportion of the designs. The subjects on the lamps, in fact,
represent not so much the great masterpieces of art, as do coins or
gems, but, like the Greek vases, the popular art of the day, and may be
compared with the illustrations of the popular journals and magazines
of our own time. On the whole, they are of great value to us as
illustrating Roman life and religion, just as subsequently those on the
Christian lamps are of inestimable importance for the light they throw
on the early ages of our own religion.

As the number of published lamps and catalogues of collections is so
very small, the subjects included in the following list are mostly
confined to the collections in the British Museum, which are quite
sufficiently comprehensive for the purpose.[2799] A few additional
examples are given from the Guildhall, Vienna, and other collections,
from the _Antichità di Ercolano_, Bartoli’s _Lucernae veterum
sepulcrales_, the _Musée Alaoui_, and other isolated sources.[2800]
References to Passeri’s work, _Lucernae fictiles Musei Passerii_, have
been avoided, as it has been shown by Dr. Dressel[2801] that nearly all
those published by him are false.

We proceed to note the principal subjects in detail, observing
practically the same order that was adopted in describing the subjects
on Greek vases. They may be roughly divided into eight classes:—

          (1) Olympian deities.
          (2) Miscellaneous deities.
          (3) Heroic legends, etc.
          (4) Historical and literary subjects.
          (5) _Genre_ subjects.
          (6) Animals.
          (7) Inanimate objects.
          (8) Floral and decorative devices.

The Olympian deities are not often represented, some not at all, except
on a lamp in the Kestner collection at Göttingen, which has busts of
all the twelve[2802]; they are not, however, clearly distinguished by
attributes. Zeus is represented with Hera and Athena, the three
Capitoline deities of Rome, whom the Etruscans knew as Tinia, Thalna,
and Menerfa, the Romans as Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva.[2803] He also
appears alone, seated on his throne,[2804] but more commonly his bust
only is represented (Plate LXIV. fig. 4), accompanied by his eagle,
which perches on a thunderbolt, sometimes conventionally
rendered.[2805] The eagle and the thunderbolt also appear alone,[2806]
or the former with Ganymede.[2807] A bearded horned mask may be
intended for Dionysos, but is more probably Zeus Ammon.[2808] Sarapis
is sometimes enthroned, with Cerberus at his side[2809]; sometimes only
his bust occurs, surmounted by the usual _kalathos_[2810]; Cerberus is
also found alone.[2811] Hera, except in the instance mentioned, does
not occur. A very interesting lamp from Salamis, Cyprus, now in the
British Museum, represents the contest of Athena and Poseidon for the
possession of Attica[2812]; it is doubtless a reminiscence of the
Parthenon west pediment, though rough and indistinct in execution.
Athena is also seen as a single figure,[2813] seated, or standing in
the usual Promachos attitude, or before an altar, or pursuing a
panther[2814]; her head or bust are not uncommon.[2815] Apollo is
usually represented seated, playing on his lyre, or with the Gryphon at
his side[2816]; Artemis appears as a huntress, accompanied by her
hound, or drawing an arrow from her quiver.[2817] A lyre or a crescent
appearing alone may be the symbols of these two deities.[2818] There
are one or two possible instances of Hephaistos and Poseidon,[2819] and
Demeter may be indicated by a pair of torches[2820]; the latter also
appears in her chariot, seeking for Persephone.[2821] Ares or Mars is
found either as a single figure,[2822] in a chariot,[2823] or playing
with Eros, who steals his armour.[2824] Hermes appears as a single
figure, or accompanied by a sheep, goat, or cock[2825]; in one instance
he presents a purse to Fortune, who is accompanied by Herakles.[2826] A
common subject is his bust, along with his attributes of the purse and
caduceus[2827]; the latter attribute, accompanied by two hands joined,
may also have reference to this deity.[2828] Aphrodite occurs but
rarely; she is either represented accompanied by lions,[2829] or riding
on a goat,[2830] or at the bath or toilet,[2831] or in the Cnidian
type,[2832] all these types being probably reproductions of known works
of art. She is also accompanied by Eros, who assists in arming her;
this type is known as Venus Victrix, and is seen in a group of
Aphrodite and Eros in the Louvre.[2833]

More common than all the Olympian deities put together is Eros or
Cupid, who appears in all sorts of attitudes and actions, besides those
already mentioned.[2834] He sits on a chair or reclines on a
couch,[2835] or is represented in motion, carrying a hare[2836] or a
bird, a dish of fruit or a branch of vine or palm, a cup, situla, or
torch[2837]; or plays on the lyre, flutes, or Pan-pipes[2838]; or
sacrifices a pig, or pours wine into a krater.[2839] He rides on a
donkey,[2840] a dolphin, or a crocodile,[2841] or sails in a
boat[2842]; plays with a chained lion,[2843] or is himself tied to a
tree.[2844] He is represented in the character of Ares, armed with
spear and shield; or in that of Dionysos, with cup and thyrsos; or of
Herakles, whose club he carries; also, probably in the character of
Herakles, he shoots at a serpent.[2845] He is also associated with
Psyche,[2846] and two Erotes sometimes appear together, in one instance
in the character of gladiators fighting, in another of boxers.[2847]
One of the most remarkable lamps in the Museum collection (No. 168)
represents a number of diminutive Erotes playing with the club and cup
of Herakles; it is unfortunately fragmentary, but another example in
Dresden gives the complete design.[2848] One plunges head-foremost into
the cup; three others raise the club with difficulty from the ground,
one supporting it with his back, and a fifth, hovering in the air,
pulls at it with his hands. In front of the last-named are the words
ADIVATE SODALES, “Help, comrades!”

Dionysos is another surprisingly rare figure on the lamps, though his
followers, the Satyrs and Maenads, have their full share of
representation. He occurs as a single figure of youthful
appearance,[2849] and also with his panther, to which he offers his
kantharos to drink from[2850]; his mask or head may also be
recognised.[2851] Pan is occasionally found,[2852] in one case in the
form known as Aegipan (see p. 60) in company with Echo,[2853] in
another as a grotesque bust.[2854] There is also an instance of Marsyas
hung up for his punishment to the branch of a tree.[2855] A pastoral
deity playing flutes on the handle of a lamp in the B.M. (No. 366) may
be either Pan or Marsyas. Satyrs are represented seizing Maenads,[2856]
dancing, drinking, and playing on the Pan-pipes,[2857] or carrying cups
and wine-skins,[2858] or with a goat[2859]; both the bearded and
beardless types are found, and their masks or busts are also
common.[2860] The shaggy-haired Papposeilenos is occasionally
represented.[2861] Maenads are depicted dancing, in frenzied attitudes,
or sacrificing kids; the type is often that of the “new-Attic” reliefs,
derived originally from Scopas, of the Maenad ??µa???f????.[2862] Their
heads and masks also occur.[2863]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                             PLATE LXIV.

[Illustration:

  ROMAN LAMPS WITH MYTHOLOGICAL AND LITERARY SUBJECTS
  (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

         ------------------------------------------------------

Among the minor deities we find that Helios and Selene (Sol and Luna)
are often depicted together,[2864] or Selene alone,[2865] or else their
busts together,[2866] or separately[2867]; in one case there is a
simple representation of the solar disc for Helios.[2868] A curious
subject in the British Museum collection is apparently a combination of
the Christian “Good Shepherd” with Helios and the crescent for
Selene.[2869] Asklepios and Hygieia occur in rare instances,[2870] and
there is an example of Charon in his boat.[2871] Of marine deities and
monsters, Triton or Proteus, wearing the _pileus_ or mariner’s
cap,[2872] Scylla,[2873] and a Nereid riding on a sea-monster (Plate
LXIV. fig. 1)[2874] are found. The popularity of exotic religions at
Rome is testified to by the occurrence, on the one hand, of Kybele with
her lions,[2875] and Atys[2876]; on the other, of Egyptian deities such
as Sarapis, already mentioned, and Harpocrates, who is found either
alone, or with Isis, or with Isis and Anubis,[2877] or with Safekh
(Plate LXIII. fig. 3)[2878]; Isis and Horus, and busts of Hermanubis
and Isis are also found.[2879] On the handle of a lamp is a
_lectisternium_ with busts of Sarapis and Isis, and of Helios and
Selene.[2880] The busts of the two Kabeiri also occasionally
appear.[2881] Among personifications or quasi-personifications we find
the three Charites or Graces[2882] and a Muse with lyre[2883]; others
are all typically Roman, such as a bust of Africa on a lamp from
Carthage,[2884] and such types as Abundantia[2885] (or two cornucopiae
as her symbol[2886]), Vertumnus,[2887] Fortune with her steering-oar
and cornucopia,[2888] and Victory.[2889] Many of these seem to be
reflections of bronze statuettes of the Roman period.[2890] The latter
goddess is frequently found, bearing a wreath, a trophy, or a
shield,[2891] sometimes reclining or in a chariot[2892]; or again
between two Lares[2893]; or two Victories are grouped together.[2894]
Of special interest are what are known as the New Year lamps, given as
_strenae_ on January 1st (see p. 398),[2895] on which Victory is
represented holding a shield, on which is inscribed an aspiration (see
p. 420) for a happy New Year, the head of Janus, cakes, coins
(_stipes_), and other emblems filling in the rest of the design (Plate
LXIV. fig. 5).[2896]

Occasionally the inscription is varied, and appears as “For the safety
of the state”[2897] or “Happiness” simply.[2898] Two Lares confronted,
holding cornucopia, etc., are also found without Victory.[2899] Of
representations of Phobos (Fear) we have spoken already (see p. 398).
There are also representations of terminal deities,[2900] as well as
unidentified goddesses.[2901]

Coming now to the heroes and heroic legends, we find that they play on
the whole an inconsiderable part in the list of subjects on lamps. Leda
is represented with the swan,[2902] and the Dioskuri sometimes appear
as busts[2903]; also Kastor as a full figure, accompanied by his
horse.[2904] Of the labours of Herakles we have the Nemean lion,[2905]
the Erymanthian boar,[2906] the hydra,[2907] and the slaying of the
serpent in the Garden of the Hesperides,[2908] as well as the combat
with a Centaur[2909] and the freeing of Prometheus.[2910] He is also
represented as a single figure, holding the apples of the
Hesperides,[2911] leading kids,[2912] or with a jug or
drinking-cup,[2913] or his head alone (both bearded and beardless
types).[2914] Theseus slays the Amazon Andromache[2915]; Perseus is
represented carrying the Gorgon’s head[2916]; Bellerophon is seen
fallen from his horse Pegasos, or leading him to drink at
Peirene[2917]; there are also possible representations of Kadmos and
Meleager.[2918] Europa is depicted on the bull[2919]; Endymion
asleep[2920]; Aktaeon devoured by his hounds[2921]; Telephos suckled by
the hind[2922]; and Eos pursuing Kephalos.[2923] Icaros in his
attempted flight is watched by Minos from the walls of Knossos (Plate
LXIV. fig. 2).[2924] From the Theban legend we have only Oedipus before
the Sphinx,[2925] a scene from the _Phoenissae_ of Euripides (see p.
415), and Amphion and Zethos seizing the bull for the punishment of
Dirke.[2926] Nor are scenes from the Trojan cycle much more common; but
Achilles and Thetis are represented,[2927] and also Achilles dragging
the body of Hector round the walls of Troy[2928]; there is a curious
scene, somewhat grotesquely treated, of Odysseus and Neoptolemos
stealing the bow of Philoktetes, who fans his wounded foot[2929]; Ajax
is seen grieving after his madness[2930]; and Aeneas carries off his
aged father and his son from Troy.[2931] Odysseus appears before
Kirke,[2932] passing the Sirens,[2933] and offering a cup to
Polyphemos,[2934] but sometimes also without the Cyclops. Orestes
appears at his trial before Athena in the presence of a Fury.[2935] A
Centaur is seen carrying off a woman, and in combat with a
Lapith[2936]; also with a lion,[2937] carrying an amphora,[2938] or
playing flutes.[2939] An Amazon wounded, standing at an altar, and
accompanied by a crane, are also among the list of subjects.[2940] A
single figure of Pegasos,[2941] and the Gorgoneion or
Medusa-head,[2942] are not infrequently found. Combats of Pygmies and
cranes,[2943] and a Pygmy on a crocodile,[2944] may also perhaps be
included under this heading.

The next group of subjects includes those of a historical or literary
character. In the British Museum there are two very interesting
representations of Diogenes in his tub or _pithos_ (see Vol. I. p.
152), presumably addressing Alexander, as in the well-known
story,[2945] but the latter is not represented (Plate LXIV. fig. 6).

Among portraits are busts of Aesop,[2946] and various Roman personages,
such as Hadrian, Antonia, Trajan, Marcus Aurelius, Septimius Severus,
Commodus, Julia Domna,[2947] Lucius Verus,[2948] and others who cannot
be identified.[2949] A scene from the _Phoenissae_ of Euripides occurs
on one lamp, with the combat of the two brothers and the death of
Jocasta; the name of the play is actually inscribed on the lamp.[2950]
With reference to Virgil’s first Eclogue we find a representation of
the shepherd Tityrus on a lamp found at Pozzuoli[2951]; the shepherd,
whose name is given, is seated among his flocks. Several lamps
illustrate the well-known fable of Aesop, of the Fox and Crow.[2952]
The fox, wearing a chlamys, stands on his hind-legs holding up a pair
of flutes to the crow, which is perched on the top of a tree. Another
subject, which doubtless has reference to some fable, is that of a
stork holding in its beak a balance, in which a mouse is weighed
against an elephant.[2953] The humour of the subject lies in the fact
that the mouse is seen to weigh the elephant down. These two are
illustrated on Plate LXV. figs. 3, 6. There is also a lamp in the
British Museum (Plate LXIII. fig. 2) with a curious subject which may
either be a scene from a comedy like those on the South Italian vases,
or else a parody of “a visit to Asklepios.”[2954]

The subjects taken from ordinary life are eminently characteristic of
the social life of Rome under the Empire. An almost inordinate
proportion relate to the now popular gladiatorial shows, and many
others deal with the events of the circus and arena. Of gladiatorial
subjects there are three principal varieties, which occur again and
again on lamps of all shapes and periods with little alteration.[2955]
One class represents a single gladiator in the characteristic armour,
with visored helmet, greaves, and arm-guards, sword and shield[2956];
the next represents a combat of two (Plate LXV. fig. 5), in which the
one is usually worsted and falls at the other’s feet, his shield on the
ground beside him.[2957] An interesting example in the British Museum
(No. 526) shows a _mirmillo_ or _secutor_ in combat with a _retiarius_,
who fought with net and trident. The third series has representations
of gladiatorial armour ranged in a circle: swords, shields, arm-guards,
greaves, and helmets.[2958]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                              PLATE LXV.

[Illustration:

  ROMAN LAMPS WITH MISCELLANEOUS SUBJECTS
  (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

         ------------------------------------------------------

From the circus and games we have such subjects as a naval contest in
the amphitheatre[2959]; a bull-fight[2960]; a _bestiarius_ contending
with boars[2961]; a man leaping over a bull[2962]; and boxers.[2963] A
remarkable lamp in the British Museum (No. 164 = Plate LXV. fig. 4)
gives a representation of a chariot-race in the circus; we have the
colonnade of latticed barriers (_carceres_) from which the chariots
started, the _spina_ down the middle of the course, adorned with
shrines and obelisks, and rows of seats full of spectators; four
chariots take part in the race. Next there are scenes such as an
athlete crowning himself, a victorious charioteer in his quadriga, or a
victory in the horse-race.[2964] Of more miscellaneous character are
such subjects as a chariot drawn by four men, a two-horse or four-horse
chariot by itself, or a man or boy on horseback.[2965]

Military subjects are at all times rare, but a not infrequent subject
is a mounted warrior charging with a spear[2966]; a soldier is also
depicted with a bird,[2967] at an altar, taking an oath, and saluting
an officer who rides past.[2968] There are also representations of an
_imperator_ on his triumphal car,[2969] of an eagle and standard,[2970]
and of a trophy perhaps commemorating a victory over barbarians.[2971]
A representation of a ship or galley is not uncommon, but sometimes it
is not easy to distinguish these from the type of Odysseus and the
Sirens.[2972] Some lamps have landscapes in the style of Alexandrine
reliefs and chased metalwork, as for instance a harbour surrounded by
buildings, in which two fishermen pursue their vocation (Plate LXV.
fig. 1),[2973] or a hunter accompanied by a porter, with a town in the
background.[2974] Among pastoral scenes we have also, besides the
Tityrus already mentioned, shepherds and goatherds with their dogs,
tending sheep and goats which nibble the foliage of trees[2975];
fishermen,[2976] and hunters, as already noted. Another interesting
type is that of a juggler or mountebank accompanied by a dog and a cat,
which climb ladders, jump through rings, and perform other tricks
(Plate LXV. fig. 2).[2977] Of a more miscellaneous character are such
subjects as a butcher slaughtering animals hung from a tree[2978]; a
fuller at work[2979]; a slave washing a dog, and another washing a
statue[2980]; slaves carrying casks or _fasces_[2981]; a mule turning a
mill.[2982] Others, again, do not admit of any exact classification;
such are a man and woman embracing; a woman scraping herself after the
bath; a youth with a mortar; the sacrifice of a pig[2983]; a man riding
on a camel or elephant,[2984] or driving a camel[2985]; a dwarf in a
boat or playing on a flute[2986]; comic actors,[2987] and comic and
tragic masks[2988] innumerable; and two skeletons dancing.[2989]

Animals form a large proportion of the representations on lamps,[2990]
especially on the late class without handle from Knidos (Vol. I. p.
108), and include Gryphons, elephants, lions, panthers, boars, bears,
wolves, deer, horses, oxen, sheep, goats, dogs, rabbits, eagles,
storks, ostriches,[2991] peacocks,[2992] parrots,[2993] cocks and hens,
and other birds; dolphins, sea-horses, cuttle-fish and other kinds of
fish, scorpions,[2994] frogs, shell-fish, and so on. Those mentioned so
far are single figures, merely decorative; in others there is more
definite action. Such are a lion attacking a bull or crocodile, or
seizing a hind or a donkey[2995]; two bears dancing[2996]; a monkey and
vine[2997]; a dog on a couch,[2998] fighting with a goose, or attacking
a stag,[2999] hind, or boar[3000]; two monkeys in a boat[3001]; a hare
or rabbit nibbling at a plant[3002]; a bird on a twig, sometimes eating
fruit[3003]; an eagle seizing a hare[3004]; an ibis and a
serpent[3005]; a hen with chickens, cocks fighting, or a cock pursuing
a hen[3006]; dolphins twisted round a trident or anchor; a crocodile
and serpent; a lizard or sea-monster and eel; two serpents, sea-horses,
or dolphins with an altar between[3007]; and a grasshopper eating
grapes.[3008]

There are also a large number of lamps, the centre of which is only
ornamented with some decorative motive, such as a _carchesium_ (Vol. I.
p. 188), situla, or krater, from which spring vine-branches, ivy, or
other plants; an oinochoë, flask, or drinking-cup; palm-branches,
wreaths of ivy, vine, oak, and myrtle, sprays of flowers; a cornucopia
and caduceus,[3009] or other emblems of deities, such as two hands
joined with a caduceus behind them (see p. 410); scallop-shells; or
purely conventional patterns, such as large four-leaved flowers, stars,
and rosettes. The latter are mostly found on lamps from Greek sites,
especially in Cyprus, and at Tarsus and Knidos. Many lamps have no
decoration on the _discus_, but only comic masks round the edge, or a
border of foliage.

The Christian lamps are as a rule easily to be distinguished from the
pagan by their form, as well as by their subjects. These subjects are
mainly taken from the Old Testament, from the life of our Lord, and
from the sphere of symbolism; the Good Shepherd, the seven-branched
candlestick, the cross or _labarum_, and the sacred monogram, are all
favourites.[3010]

                  *       *       *       *       *

A considerable number of Roman lamps have inscriptions, either
impressed in relief or hollow letters from a stamp, or engraved with a
pointed instrument; the stamps were probably of bronze. Potters’
signatures and trade-marks are always underneath the lamp, and those
found on the top usually relate in some way to the subject. Sometimes,
as in lamps from Pozzuoli and Naples,[3011] the inscriptions are in
relief on the surface, in small tablets. They may, however, be
classified under four headings:—

    (1) Inscriptions referring to the circumstances under which or for
      which the lamp was made, as, for instance, with reference to
      national events or public games, or for religious dedications.

    (2) Inscriptions descriptive of the subjects.

    (3) Acclamations or formulae addressed by the potter to the public.

    (4) Signatures of potters or trade-marks; this class is by far the
      most numerous.

To the first class belong some of the formulae to which allusion has
already been made (pp. 396, 398), such as those on the New Year lamps:
ANNVM NOVVM FAVSTVM FELICEM MIHI HIC (or TIBI, or to some person whose
name is given); occasionally this is varied by formulae such as
FIILICTII (for FELICITAS?), “Happiness (to you)!”[3012] OB CIVES
SERV(_atos_), “For the preservation of the state”[3013]; G · P · R · F,
_Genio populi Romani feliciter_[3014]; EX·S·C, “By the decree of the
senate”[3015]; FIDES PVBLICA, “The public trust,”[3016] and the
SAECVLI, SAECVLO, SAECVLARES group of inscriptions,[3017] which may in
a few cases refer to the Ludi Saeculares, but more probably are of
similar import to the SAEC(_ulum_) AV(_reum_) DOM(_ini_), “The golden
age of our lord,“ on a lamp from Antium.[3018] The last-named formula,
it should be noted, is found both above and below the lamps.
LVCER(_na_) PV(_b_)LICA probably refers to the use of the lamp in some
public illuminations (see p. 396).[3019] A lamp in the Trier
Museum[3020] has the names of the consuls for the year 235 (Severus and
Quintianus). Among names of deities for whose sanctuaries the lamps
were intended are Venus (SACRVM VENERI, with a figure of the
goddess),[3021] and the Ephesian Artemis ([??????S ?F?S?O?]).[3022]

Among the inscriptions relating to the subjects on the lamps are
several which have already been mentioned, such as DIOGENES and
TITVRVS, and also GA(_ny_)MEDES over a figure of the same.[3023] On a
lamp representing the flight of Aeneas from Troy are the names
AEN(_eas_), ANC(_hises_), ASC(_anius_), and the exclamation REX PIE,
alluding to the former.[3024] On another, which represents the fight of
Eteokles and Polyneikes and the death of Jocasta, subjects taken from
the _Phoenissae_ of Euripides, occur not only the letters PVL for
Polyneikes, but also PHO(_e_)NISS(_ae_), leaving no doubt as to the
source whence the scenes are taken.[3025] Another in the form of Eros
or a Genius with the club and lion-skin of Herakles, lying asleep, has
on it the curious inscription AIA STLACIA TVRA DORMIT, STERNIT SIR
...,[3026] the import of which is not quite clear. Similar inscriptions
often occur in scenes from the circus or amphitheatre, giving the names
of gladiators, as Afer, Helenus, Popillius, or Sabinus,[3027] or of
charioteers in the circus-races, as C. Annius Lacerta and the horse
Corax, which won him a race for the white faction at the Secular
Games[3028]; another lamp has the name of a horse or his driver,
INCITATVS, and a third the exhortation VIG(_i_)LA PRASINE,[3029] which
may allude to a driver of the green faction. Over the figure of a
warrior on a lamp from Carthage is PLVS FECISSES SI PLVS LICERET, “You
would have done more if you had had the chance.”[3030] In other cases
there seems to be a revival of the old Greek fashion of apostrophising
the figures as _Kalos_—_e.g._ AQVILO CALOS, AXOLMVS (_c_)ALOS.[3031]
There are also inscriptions put into the mouths of figures, as in the
subject of Cupids with the club of Herakles, one of whom cries
ADIV(_v_)ATE SODALES, “Help, comrades!”[3032] or the funerary Genius
weeping over an urn and saying, LVGEO, “I mourn.”[3033]

To the third class belong such expressions as HAVE, “Hail!”[3034];
VIVAS or VALEAS, “Long life!”; VTERE, “Use this”[3035]; AVE ET VALE,
“Greeting and farewell,” on a lamp from Cologne[3036]; and on another
from the same site, HAVE · MACENA · VILLIS · HAVE · LASCIBA ·
VALE,[3037] which seems to have a somewhat coarse significance. Others
allude to the future purchaser, as EME ME, “Buy me”[3038]; QVI FECERIT
VIVAT ET Q(_ui_) EMERIT, “May the potter and purchaser flourish”; EMITE
LVCERNAS AB ASSE COLATAS, “Buy lamps for an ass”[3039]; BONO QVI
EME(_rit_), “May it be for his good who shall buy it.”[3040] The latter
class are chiefly found in North Africa. Mention has already been made
of the inscriptions on the Esquiline lamps, such as PONE FVR; these are
not found on lamps of imperial times, and appear to be peculiar to the
early fabrics. ?? ?pt?? has been found on a lamp at Athens.[3041] On a
lamp from Spain is inscribed G · IVLIVS · ARTEMIDOR ... LVCERNAS · II ·
D D, “C. Julius Artemidorus makes a present of two lamps.”[3042] A very
curious inscription is found written in ink on a lamp at Rome, to this
effect: “Helenus delivers his name to the nether world; he carries down
with him coins, a New Year’s gift, and his lamp; let no one deliver him
except us who have made them.”[3043]

                  *       *       *       *       *

Potters’ signatures are almost invariably to be found on the under side
of the lamp, where they are arranged on the diameter at right angles to
the axis of the lamp; sometimes they are placed in a panel or tablet,
or within the outline of a foot. In rare instances they are found on
the handle, or on the top.[3044] Greek lamps which are not of Roman
origin are never signed, nor are those of Christian origin; the oldest
signatures are to be found on the Esquiline lamps, but they rarely
appear before imperial times, when they become fairly general. Among
these earlier instances are PRAESE(_ntis_)[3045] and FL(_a_)BIA
(_Flavia_), the latter found at Carthage.[3046] More frequently, lamps
of this kind have a single letter or monogram by way of stamp[3047]; a
“delphiniform” lamp in the Musée Alaoui has a monogram of ? and ?. A
single letter sometimes occurs above or below the inscription, which
may be regarded as a sort of trade-mark indicating the potter
(_figulus_), the full name being that of the _officinator_ or master;
on a lamp in the British Museum from Knidos (No. 132) the name
ROMANE(_n_)SIS is accompanied by the letter X; on another, FORTIS by
the letter N. On the lamps signed by L · HOS · CRI, a Gaulish potter,
are found the letters G, I, L, M, P, S, T, V, N, Z, and other
signs.[3048] These trade-marks are not confined to letters; Fortis uses
a wreath and palm-branch, as in Fig. 210; L. Caecilius Saevus a
palm-branch or a foot-shaped stamp; L. Fabricius Masculus the letters H
and X, a wheel, or a star.[3049] Other lamps have no name underneath,
but some simple pattern, such as five circles in _quincunx_ form, or
the favourite device of the foot-shaped stamp (cf. p. 333). These
varieties of marks were probably intended to distinguish different
series in the products of a single pottery.

[Illustration: FIG. 210. UNDER SIDE OF LAMP WITH SIGNATURE OF FORTIS
(BRIT. MUS.).]

The signatures are usually abbreviated, the full form being _ex
officina_ (_officinatoris_), the name being consequently in the
genitive. On a lamp from Rome is EX · OF · AIACIS, _ex officina
Aiacis_.[3050] Sometimes, but rarely under the Empire, the nominative
is used: _A.B. fecit_, or more commonly _A.B.f._ Thus we have AVGENDI,
ATIMETI, C . IVLI NICEPHORI, or ASPRENAS, FELIX, TROPHIMVS. But where a
single name occurs it is rarely full enough to show the case. On a lamp
at Dresden the potter Diomedes calls himself LVCERNARIVS.[3051] From
the second century down to the time of Augustus the name may be either
in the nominative or genitive, either the _praenomen_ and _nomen_, or
the _nomen_ or _cognomen_ only; these signatures were all incised while
the clay was moist. In the period represented by the third class (see
p. 401) nearly all the signatures are _cognomina_ simply, as ATIMETI,
COMMVNIS, FORTLS, STROBILI, all in the genitive. In the fourth class,
or lamps of the second century, the nominative is very rare; the names
are usually abbreviated, and one (_cognomen_), two (_nomen_ and
_cognomen_), or three may be found. Potteries were, as we have seen,
often owned by women, hence female names are not uncommon.
Abbreviations of a particular name vary considerably; for instance, L.
Caecilius Saevus appears as L · CAEC · SAE, L · CAE · SAE, L · CA · SAE
(see below, p. 428); L. Fabricius Masculus as L · FABRIC · MASC, L ·
FABRIC · MAS, L · FABR · MASC, FABRIC · MAS, and so on.[3052] Or the
_praenomen_ may vary, and for C · OPPI · RES we find L · OPPI · RES;
or, again, the _cognomen_, as in the case of C. Junius, where it may be
Alexis, Bitus, or Draco,[3053] or of L. Munatius, found with Adjectus,
Restitutus, Successus, Threptus, and Philemo.[3054] The variations in
the names may denote potteries in connection, or successive holders of
one business. In one instance the name of a workman PVLCHER occurs with
that of Fabricius Masculus, in another that of PRIMVS with C. Oppius
Restitutus.[3055] Greek names, where they occur, seem to imply that the
potters were freedmen, as in the case of Dionysius, Phoetaspus, and
others.

The following list gives the names most frequently found, with the
localities in which they occur[3056]:—

  _Annius Serapiodorus_ (ANNI · SER): Rome, Ostia.

  _C. Atilius Vestalis_ (C · ATILI · VEST): Rome, Italy, Gaul, Britain.

  _Atimetus_: Italy, Gallia Narbonensis, Pannonia.

  _L. Caecilius Saevus_ (L · CAE · SAE): Rome, Southern Italy, Sicily,
      Sardinia, Gallia Narbonensis, Britain.

  _Clodius Heliodorus_ (CLO · HEL): Italy, Africa, Spain, Gaul.

  _C. Clodius Successus_ (C · CLO · SVC): Rome, Gaul, Sardinia, Africa.

  _Communis_: Rome, Pompeii, Gallia Cisalpina, Pannonia.

  _Crescens_: Gaul, Pannonia.

  _L. Fabricius Masculus_ (L · FABR · MASC): Rome, Gallia Cisalpina,
      Africa.

  _Florentius_ (FLORENT): Rome, Italy, Sicily, Tunis, Gaul, Germany,
      Britain.

  _Fortis_: Rome, Italy, Sicily, Dalmatia, Germany, Gaul, Britain.

  _Gabinia_: Italy, Sardinia, Africa, Gaul.

  _L. Hospidius Crispus_ (L · HOS · CRI): Gaul.

  _C. Julius Nicephorus_ (C · IVLI · NICEP): Italy, Gaul.

  _C. Junius Alexis_: Rome, Campania, Sicily, Sardinia, Africa.

  _C. Junius Bito_: Italy, Sicily, Gaul.

  _C. Junius Draco_: Rome, Italy, Sicily, Sardinia, Africa, Gallia
      Narbonensis.

  _L. Mar. Mi._: Rome, Campania, Sicily, Spain, Gallia Cisalpina.

  _L. Munatius_ (with various _cognomina_): Rome, Africa.

  _N. Naevius Luc._ (N · NAEV · LVC): Italy, Sardinia, Spain, Gaul.

  _M. Novius Justus_ (M · NOV · IVST): Rome, Naples, Sicily, Sardinia,
      Africa, Gallia Narbonensis.

  _C. Oppius Restitutus_ (C · OPPI · RES): Rome, Italy, Sicily,
      Sardinia, Africa, Gallia Narbonensis, Cyprus.

  _Passenus Augurinus_ (PAS · AVG): Italy, Gaul.

  _Phoetaspus_: Italy, Gaul, Pannonia.

  _Strobilus_: Rome, Italy, Africa, Pannonia, Dalmatia, Gaul, Britain.

  _Vibianus_: Gaul, Pannonia.

  _C. Viciri Agathopus_ (C · VICIRI · AGAT): Italy, Sardinia, Gallia
      Cisalpina.

It will be noted that nearly all are found at Rome, but that the others
fall into geographical groups; the same name is seldom found both in
the north and south of the Empire. Thus Fortis is not found in Africa,
Oppius Restitutus only rarely in Gaul. Certain names are entirely
localised, as Annius Serapiodorus at Rome and Ostia, L. Hos. Cri. and
Marcellus in Gaul, Q. Mem. Kar. and Pudens in Sardinia. The name of
Vindex, a maker of terracotta figures at Cologne (see above, p. 383),
is found on lamps at Trier and Nimeguen.[3057]

The distribution of the Fortis lamps in particular is remarkable. They
have been found in several places in Gallia Cisalpina, such as
Aquileia[3058]; at Lyons, Aix, Orange, and elsewhere in France[3059];
at Nimeguen in Holland[3060]; at Trier, Cologne, Mainz, and Louisendorf
in Germany[3061]; in London[3062]; in Spain[3063]; and over the region
of Dacia, Pannonia, and Dalmatia,[3064] as well as in Rome and
Italy.[3065] The most natural conclusion to be drawn from these results
is that the majority of the lamps seem to have been made in Italy, and
it has been thought probable that there were three principal centres of
fabric whence exportation went on in different directions—Rome and its
environs, Campania for the lamps found in Southern Italy, Africa, and
the Mediterranean, and Gallia Cisalpina for those found in Central
Europe.[3066] It has also been suggested that the last-named fabric
centred in Mutina (Modena) and that this was the place where the lamps
of Class III. (see p. 401) were chiefly made.[3067] Outside Italy there
may well have been manufactures in North Africa, where lamps are so
plentiful, and in Gallia Narbonensis, to which region some signatures
are peculiar. Evidence of a lamp-manufacturer in Africa seems to be
afforded by the mention of _praedia Pullaenorum_ in an inscription from
Tunis,[3068] the lamps of Pullaenus occurring in Sardinia and Africa.
Local fabrics of very poor lamps were doubtless numerous.

A certain number of Roman lamps have Greek signatures, not differing in
character but only in alphabet from the Latin inscriptions. The most
curious instance is that of [???S??] [???????] for _Celsi Pompeii_,
which is found on lamps in Southern Italy[3069]; ??µp????? is also
found at Naples, and even ?ßas???t?? and ??e?µ??, which are usually
associated with lamps made in Greece (see Vol. I. p. 108), occur on
some found in Italy.[3070] In Sicily we find the signatures of
Apollophanes of Tyre ([??????F??] [?????]) at Himera and Proklos
Agyrios ([????? ?G??]) at Gela and Catania[3071]; ?????? for Regulus
occurs at Tarentum.[3072] Greek names are often found in Cyprus,[3073]
and conversely a large number of lamps found at Knidos by Sir Charles
Newton bore the signature ROMANE(_n_) [ROMANE(n)SIS], in Latin letters
with the S reversed, apparently suggesting that the lamps were made by
a Roman abroad.[3074] Greek signatures are even found in Gaul and
Germany.[3075]

Mention must also be made here of the recent researches of Herr
Fink[3076] with the object of ascertaining the chronological succession
and general distribution of the signatures on lamps of the Imperial
period. Starting with the four main classes of forms which have already
been laid down as the basis[3077] (the distinction resting mainly on
the various forms of the nozzle), he has obtained, by comparison
chiefly of the lamps in the British Museum, Berlin, and Munich
collections, the following interesting results.

Certain stamps appear to be peculiar, or almost peculiar, to each
class: thus, in Class I. only, we find P. Cessius Felix and L. Munatius
Successus; in Class II. only, L. Fabricius Masculus; in Class III.
only, Atimetus, Fortis, Phoetaspus, and other single _cognomina_; in
Class IV., which contains by far the larger number of stamps, Clodius
Helvidius, C. Junius Bitus,[3078] L. Munatius Threptus, and C.
Cornelius Ursus. The lamps of the Gaulish potter L. Hospidius Crispus
are all of one peculiar form, a transition between Fink’s I. and
IV.[3079] Cross-instances are very rare, but C. Junius Draco is found
in Classes I. and IV., C. Oppius Restitutus in Classes II. and IV.,
Florentius and Celsus Pompeius in Classes III. and IV. It is also
interesting to note that there are lamps in Class IV. with the
Christian monogram and the figure of the Good Shepherd. In Class I.,
generally speaking, signatures are very rare; in Class III. they are
almost invariable, but the total number of lamps is relatively small.
Another curious result is that certain signatures, such as L. Caecilius
Saevus, Bassus, Cerialis, Sextus Egnatius Aprilis, and Romanensis, are
not confined to one type of lamp, but in these cases it is to be noted
that each type has a variation of signature: thus, in Class I.,
L·CAEC·SAE; in II., L·CAE·SAE; in III., L·CA·SAE; while in IV.,
L·CAE·SAE occurs no less than 140 times.

His conclusions are that one workshop did not necessarily set itself to
produce only one form, but that the differences in form are merely due
to changes of fashion. In Class I. Greek technical instincts are still
strong as regards form and choice of subjects, but in ornament the
taste of Southern Italy prevails; the subjects are mainly mythological.
In Class II. the typically Roman motives appear: gladiators, combats,
and hunting-scenes; this form, according to Fink, is more developed
than Class I. Evidence which has been obtained from Regensburg shows
that Class III. belongs to the time from Augustus to Hadrian, and, as
we have seen, it is chiefly confined to the north of the Apennines.
Where provincial potteries can be traced, as at Westerndorf and at
Westheim in Bavaria, the lamps are usually of this form, but it was
doubtless imitated in Italy. Form IV. is essentially Italian, but is
also found in Central Europe, and is evidently of late date.

-----

Footnote 2721:

  See Macrobius, _Sat._ vi. 4, 18. Lucilius uses this word and
  _lucerna_ in the same line.

Footnote 2722:

  _L.L._ v. 119.

Footnote 2723:

  _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1880, p. 265 ff.: see below, p. 399.

Footnote 2724:

  Cf. Dressel in _C.I.L._ xv. p. 784.

Footnote 2725:

  Pliny, _H.N._ xxviii. 163.

Footnote 2726:

  The corresponding Greek word was µ??a.

Footnote 2727:

  Petronius, _Sat._ 30 (Teubner edn. p. 21); Orelli, _Inscr._ 3678.

Footnote 2728:

  xiv. 41.

Footnote 2729:

  Pliny, _H.N._ xxv. 121.

Footnote 2730:

  _Moretum_, 11; Pliny, _H.N._ xix. 17, xxviii. 168, xxxv. 175.

Footnote 2731:

  La Blanchère and Gauckler, _Mus. Alaoui_, p. 193, Nos. 487-88; _Ant.
  di Ercolano_, viii. pl. 52.

Footnote 2732:

  Daremberg and Saglio, _s.v._ Lucerna, p. 1335, fig. 4605.

Footnote 2733:

  No. 393 and _Cat. of Terracottas_, C 421 (Plate IV. fig. 4); _Mus.
  Alaoui_, No. 484.

Footnote 2734:

  B.M. Nos. 2, 393.

Footnote 2735:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 6609-10; Daremberg and Saglio, fig. 4607; _Ant. di
  Ercol._ viii. pl. 12: see also p. 387.

Footnote 2736:

  _Epigr._ xiv. 39; _Moretum._ 10 ff.

Footnote 2737:

  Plutarch, _Ant._ 26; Suetonius, _Vit. Caes._ 37; Dio Cass. 63, 4.

Footnote 2738:

  Suet. _Calig._ 18; _Domit._ 4.

Footnote 2739:

  Lampridius, _Vit._ 24.

Footnote 2740:

  _Apol._ 35: cf. _ad uxorem_, ii. 6.

Footnote 2741:

  xii. 92.

Footnote 2742:

  Cf. _C.I.L._ xv. 6221; and B.M. Nos. 476, 506, 507, 534, 535.

Footnote 2743:

  Te? ???st? ?????? e????, Boeckh, _C.I.Gr._ iii. p. 1169, No. 4380
  _n_^2.

Footnote 2744:

  _Notizie degli Scavi_, 1894, p. 205.

Footnote 2745:

  _Mélanges de l’École franç. de Rome_, xii. (1892), p. 116 ff.

Footnote 2746:

  Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ i. pl. 44, p. 123.

Footnote 2747:

  Cf. Roach-Smith, _Ill. Rom. Lond._ p. 111, and _C.I.L._ vi. pt. 4,
  No. 30102 (_semper vigilet lucerna nardo_).

Footnote 2748:

  Ellis, _Townley Gallery_, ii. p. 250.

Footnote 2749:

  Orelli, 4416.

Footnote 2750:

  _C.I.L._ x. 633 (from Salerno).

Footnote 2751:

  _Ibid._ ii. 2102.

Footnote 2752:

  _Sat._ 111 (Teubner ed. p. 77).

Footnote 2753:

  See _Athen. Mitth._ 1902, p. 257 ff.; and cf. _Amer. Journ. of Arch._
  1903, p. 344.

Footnote 2754:

  Virg. _Georg._ i. 390; Apul. _Metam._ ii. 28.

Footnote 2755:

  _Homil. in Ep. ad Cor._ i. 12 (Pusey’s _Library of the Fathers_, p.
  164).

Footnote 2756:

  Cf. _C.I.L._ ii. 4969, 3; x. 8053, 5; xv. 6196-210: see also pp. 413,
  420, and Plate LXIV. fig. 5.

Footnote 2757:

  _Ibid._ xv. p. 785.

Footnote 2758:

  _Cat._ p. 47, No. 26.

Footnote 2759:

  Cf. _C.I.L._ ix. 6081, 1.

Footnote 2760:

  See also the lamps from the altar of Saturnus Balcaranensis
  (Daremberg and Saglio, iii. p. 1339).

Footnote 2761:

  B.M. 27-30, 67, 68; _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1880, pl. O; _Mus. Alaoui_,
  pl. 34, Nos. 6-12, pp. 147-48.

Footnote 2762:

  See _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1880, p. 275.

Footnote 2763:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 6631, 6900 ff.; _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1880, p. 315.

Footnote 2764:

  B.M. 25-26; _C.I.L._ xv. part 2, plate, No. 2; Daremberg and Saglio,
  _s.v._ _Lucerna_, p. 1323.

Footnote 2765:

  Cf. _Mus. Alaoui_, pl. 34, p. 149, Nos. 17-8: see also B.M. 69-82.

Footnote 2766:

  See Dressel in _C.I.L._ xv. p. 782 ff.; Toutain in Daremberg and
  Saglio, _art._ Lucerna; Fink, _Formen u. Stempel röm. Thonlampen, in
  Sitzungsberichte d. Münchener Akad._ 1900, p. 685 ff.

Footnote 2767:

  On the evidence yielded by the potters’ signatures see also below, p.
  428.

Footnote 2768:

  See the examples given on Plates LXIV.-LXV.

Footnote 2769:

  I am inclined to agree with Dr. Dressel in placing this type earlier
  than Fink’s Class I. It seems to be intermediate in form between the
  delphiniform and other types with blunt nozzles, and the type given
  in Fig. 204. Cf. _C.I.L._ xv. pl. 3.

Footnote 2770:

  Cf. _C.I.L._ xv. pl. 2, No. 5 = Fig. 206, and Dressel, _ad loc._, p.
  783.

Footnote 2771:

  Cf. _C.I.L._ v. 8114.

Footnote 2772:

  See Daremberg and Saglio, _s.v._ p. 1011, fig. 4381.

Footnote 2773:

  Cf. for bronze examples, _B.M. Cat._ 2514 ff.

Footnote 2774:

  B.M. 3, 13.

Footnote 2775:

  Plate IV. fig. 4.

Footnote 2776:

  _C.I.L._ xi. 6699, 5.

Footnote 2777:

  In the Louvre.

Footnote 2778:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 6701.

Footnote 2779:

  _Ibid._ xv. 6513; Kenner, _Ant. Thonlampen_, No. 431.

Footnote 2780:

  B.M. 9-12: see also _Guildhall Mus. Cat._ p. 49, No. 50, for negro’s
  head combined with camel’s.

Footnote 2781:

  B.M. 18-21 (bulls’ heads); 22 (eagle); _Mus. Borb._ xiv. 38; C.I.L.
  xv. 6739, 6334, 6393; _Ant. di Ercol._ viii. 27; Kenner, 437, 437a;
  _Mus. Alaoni_, pl. 36, No. 485.

Footnote 2782:

  B.M. 14-17; _C.I.L._ xv. 6287; Kenner, 434-35.

Footnote 2783:

  Greek and Roman Department, from Cologne; British and Mediaeval
  Department, from Britain; others in Guildhall Museum, and _C.I.L._
  xv. 6450.

Footnote 2784:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 6387, 6627; _ibid._ 6393 (artichoke); B.M. 24 (walnut);
  _Ant. di Ercol._ viii. 5.

Footnote 2785:

  _Metam._ xi. 245.

Footnote 2786:

  No. 1 = _Cab. Durand_, 1777: cf. Lafaye, _Culte des Divinités
  d’Alexandrie_, pp. 122, 303, No. 132; also Vol. I. pp. 209, 216.

Footnote 2787:

  See for examples in B.M., Nos. 58-66.

Footnote 2788:

  Cf. _Anzeiger_, 1889, p. 170, and B.M. Nos. 90, 91.

Footnote 2789:

  See Dalton, _B. M. Cat. of Early Christian Antiqs._ pl. 32, p. 148.

Footnote 2790:

  xiv. 114.

Footnote 2791:

  See on the subject Daremberg and Saglio, iii. p. 1334; Blümner,
  _Technologie_, ii. pp. 71, 108.

Footnote 2792:

  _Cat. of Terracottas_, E 81-83: see Fig. 209.

Footnote 2793:

  _Mus. Alaoui_, p. 253, Nos. 396-97 (Christian).

Footnote 2794:

  _Cat._ p. 51, Nos. 117-18 (from London Wall).

Footnote 2795:

  See also p. 395 above.

Footnote 2796:

  Cf. Avolio, _Fatture di argille in Sicilia_, p. 123.

Footnote 2797:

  Cf. _Rev. Arch._ xxxiii. (1898), p. 86; _Mus. Alaoui_, p. 148, No. 13.

Footnote 2798:

  _Mus. Alaoui_, p. 156, Nos. 74-81: cf. the Roman lamps of the same
  date (_C.I.L._ xv. p. 782).

Footnote 2799:

  The numbers given in the following notes are those of the forthcoming
  Catalogue of Roman lamps in the Department of Greek and Roman
  Antiquities.

Footnote 2800:

  See also _C.I.L._ xv. 6195-751 for mention of many interesting
  subjects.

Footnote 2801:

  _Röm. Mitth._ 1892, p. 144 ff.

Footnote 2802:

  _Göttingische Gelehrte Anzeigen, Nachrichten_, 1870, p. 174: cf.
  Roach-Smith, _Ill. Rom. London_, p. 111.

Footnote 2803:

  B.M. 511; _Ant. di Ercol._ viii. 1.

Footnote 2804:

  _Cyprus Mus. Cat._ 1394; B.M. 604 = Plate IV. fig. 1.

Footnote 2805:

  B.M. 270, 315, 330, 331, 394, 472-475: cf. also Roach-Smith, _Ill.
  Rom. Lond._ pl. 30, 1; _Ant. di Ercol._ viii. 1; Bartoli, ii. 4;
  Kenner, _Antike Thonlampen_, Nos. 4-6.

Footnote 2806:

  _Göttinger Nachrichten_, p. 177, No. 18; Kenner, Nos. 227, 228, 425.

Footnote 2807:

  B.M. 605; _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1866, pl. G.

Footnote 2808:

  Kenner, No. 7: cf. _Cyprus Mus. Cat._ 1385-86.

Footnote 2809:

  Kenner, No. 8; B.M. 358 (handle).

Footnote 2810:

  B.M. 395; 360-363 on handle.

Footnote 2811:

  Kenner, No. 137.

Footnote 2812:

  No. 679 = _J.H.S._ xiii. p. 93.

Footnote 2813:

  B.M. 307, 402, 466, 573: see also p. 415, note 2935.

Footnote 2814:

  Kenner, No. 10.

Footnote 2815:

  B.M. 607-609, 681, 707; _Cyprus Mus. Cat._ 1384.

Footnote 2816:

  B.M. 271, 398, 571; _Cyprus Mus. Cat._ 1356.

Footnote 2817:

  Kenner, Nos. 17-22; Bartoli, ii. 32-3; B.M. 332, 512, 680.

Footnote 2818:

  Kenner, No. 230; _Guildhall Mus. Cat._ p. 48, No. 43 (from Royal
  Exchange).

Footnote 2819:

  B.M. 572; _Mus. Alaoui_, No. 151.

Footnote 2820:

  Kenner, No. 229.

Footnote 2821:

  _Mus. Alaoui_, No. 115.

Footnote 2822:

  B.M. 94; with Sphinx, _ibid._ 574.

Footnote 2823:

  _Mus. Alaoui_, No. 142.

Footnote 2824:

  B.M. 69.

Footnote 2825:

  B.M. 554, 614; Kenner, No. 28.

Footnote 2826:

  B.M. 174.

Footnote 2827:

  B.M. 175, 176, 333, 411-413; Kenner, No. 26; Bartoli, ii. 17.

Footnote 2828:

  B.M. 432, 433; Kenner, Nos. 231-2; _Ant. di Ercol._ viii. 32.

Footnote 2829:

  Kenner, No. 23.

Footnote 2830:

  Masner, _Wiener Vasensamml._ No. 684: cf. _Anzeiger_, 1890, p. 27.

Footnote 2831:

  B.M. 575; Kenner, Nos. 24-5; _Guildhall Mus. Cat._ p. 48, No. 46;
  _Mus. Alaoui_, No. 181.

Footnote 2832:

  _Mus. Alaoui_, No. 180.

Footnote 2833:

  B.M. 70: cf. Clarac, _Musée de Sculpt._ iii. 343, 1399; _B.M.
  Terracottas_, D 286.

Footnote 2834:

  See Kenner, Nos. 37-57.

Footnote 2835:

  B.M. 410, 477.

Footnote 2836:

  B.M. 172; Roach-Smith, _Ill. Rom. Lond._ pl. 30, 6 (Brit. and
  Mediaeval Dept.).

Footnote 2837:

  B.M. 516, 610, 611, 405, 515, 364, 553.

Footnote 2838:

  B.M. 407-409, 461, 479, 612, 654.

Footnote 2839:

  B.M. 478, 406.

Footnote 2840:

  _Anzeiger_, 1889, p. 168.

Footnote 2841:

  B.M. 308, 97.

Footnote 2842:

  B.M. 170, 171.

Footnote 2843:

  _Göttinger Nachrichten_, p. 179, No. 43.

Footnote 2844:

  _Anzeiger_, _loc. cit._

Footnote 2845:

  B.M. 92, 613; 98; 95, 96, 156; 403, 404.

Footnote 2846:

  B.M. 272; Bartoli, i. 7.

Footnote 2847:

  B.M. 173, 89, 576; Bartoli, ii. 25.

Footnote 2848:

  _Anzeiger_, 1889, p. 168: cf. _C.I.L._ xv. 6230.

Footnote 2849:

  B.M. 517, 577; Bartoli, ii. 20.

Footnote 2850:

  B.M. 78.

Footnote 2851:

  B.M. 273, 499.

Footnote 2852:

  B.M. 616, 709.

Footnote 2853:

  _Arch. Zeit._ 1852, pl. 39 (in Berlin).

Footnote 2854:

  _Anzeiger_, 1889, p. 169.

Footnote 2855:

  Kenner, No. 36.

Footnote 2856:

  B.M. 481: cf. 316, 519.

Footnote 2857:

  B.M. 102, 180, 579; 183; Kenner, No. 34.

Footnote 2858:

  B.M. 101, 182; Kenner, No. 33.

Footnote 2859:

  B.M. 518.

Footnote 2860:

  B.M. 184, 274, 275, 326, 462, 500; Kenner, No. 35.

Footnote 2861:

  B.M. 181.

Footnote 2862:

  B.M. 58, 99, 578; 178, 179, 480, 618; _Bull. Comm. Arch._ 1887, p.
  366, No. 8: cf. Hauser, _Neuattische Reliefs_, p. 154, Nos. 25-32.

Footnote 2863:

  B.M. 100, 582.

Footnote 2864:

  B.M. 476.

Footnote 2865:

  B.M. 514.

Footnote 2866:

  B.M. 513; Bartoli, ii. 13.

Footnote 2867:

  B.M. 83, 334, 399, 400, 157, 606; Masner, _Wiener Vasens_. 695;
  Bartoli, ii. 11.

Footnote 2868:

  B.M. 401.

Footnote 2869:

  No. 535: cf. also _C.I.L._ xv. 6221, 20.

Footnote 2870:

  B.M. 463, 482, 615; _C.I.L._ x. 8053, 157.

Footnote 2871:

  _Guildhall Mus. Cat._ p. 48, No. 40.

Footnote 2872:

  B.M. 396, 397; _Göttinger Nachrichten_, 1870, p. 184, Nos. 103-4.

Footnote 2873:

  B.M. 523; 191, 591 (bust); Kenner, No. 71; _Mus. Alaoui_, No. 164;
  _Ant. di Ercol_. viii. 30.

Footnote 2874:

  B.M. 167; Masner, 685; Fiedler, _Castra Vetera_, pl. 8, No. 3.

Footnote 2875:

  B.M. 465; _Ant. di Ercol_. viii. 11; _Mus. Alaoui_, No. 113; _C.I.L._
  xii. 5682, 71 (K. adored by a Gallus); Kenner, No. 3, and see No. 23.

Footnote 2876:

  Kenner, No. 77.

Footnote 2877:

  B.M. 370, 467, 508; 190, 297, 280; Kenner, No. 1; _Ant. di Ercol_.
  viii. 2: cf. _B.M. Terracottas_, D 285.

Footnote 2878:

  B.M. 337.

Footnote 2879:

  B.M. 369; _Mus. Alaoui_, No. 134.

Footnote 2880:

  Daremberg and Saglio, iii. p. 1011, fig. 4381.

Footnote 2881:

  B.M 281.

Footnote 2882:

  B.M. 468-470; Bartoli, ii. 42.

Footnote 2883:

  B.M. 104, 185(?).

Footnote 2884:

  _Mus. Alaoui_, No. 82.

Footnote 2885:

  Kenner, Nos. 66-7.

Footnote 2886:

  _Ibid._ Nos. 233-4.

Footnote 2887:

  _Ibid._ Nos. 72-3.

Footnote 2888:

  B.M. 276-278, 348, 484, 510, 586; Kenner, Nos. 58-9; Bartoli, ii. 46.

Footnote 2889:

  See generally, _Ant. di Ercol._ viii. 6; Bartoli, iii. 3 (with
  wreath).

Footnote 2890:

  _E.g._ _B.M. Bronzes_, 1510 ff.

Footnote 2891:

  B.M. 189 (see p. 420), 335, 367, 520; 336; 103, 187, 188, 483: cf.
  Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ ii. pl. 15.

Footnote 2892:

  _Rev. Arch._ xxxiii. (1898), p. 229.

Footnote 2893:

  B.M. 583; Bartoli, iii. 2; _Arch. Zeit._ 1852, pl. 39.

Footnote 2894:

  B.M. 186.

Footnote 2895:

  See Marquardt, _Privatalterthümer_, p. 245; _C.I.L._ x. 8053, 5; ii.
  4969, 3, and xv. 6196 ff; Ovid, _Fasti_, i. 189 ff. These lamps date
  from the time of Augustus and his successors.

Footnote 2896:

  B.M. 309, and cf. 368, 584, 585; Bartoli, iii. 5. For a similar
  subject on a money-box see above, p. 389.

Footnote 2897:

  B.M. 189; _Ant. di Ercol._ viii. pl. 6; Bartoli, iii. 4.

Footnote 2898:

  _Guildhall Mus. Cat._ p. 47, No. 26. See for these two p. 398 above,
  and p. 420 below.

Footnote 2899:

  B.M. 84, 105, 485; Kenner, No. 83; Bartoli, i. 13-14.

Footnote 2900:

  _Rev. Arch._ xxxiii. (1898), p. 229.

Footnote 2901:

  B.M. 710 (archaic _xoanon_).

Footnote 2902:

  Kenner, No. 76; _Mus. Alaoui_, Nos. 139-40.

Footnote 2903:

  B.M. 415.

Footnote 2904:

  B.M. 521.

Footnote 2905:

  B.M. 337 (Plate LXIII.), and 486.

Footnote 2906:

  _Anzeiger_, 1889, p. 167; _Mus. Alaoui_, No. 131.

Footnote 2907:

  B.M. 619.

Footnote 2908:

  B.M. 192, 587.

Footnote 2909:

  _Cyprus Mus. Cat._ 1358.

Footnote 2910:

  B.M. 416.

Footnote 2911:

  B.M. 620; 338, 339; _Ant. di Ercol._ viii. 4 (in the three latter
  only with club and lion’s skin).

Footnote 2912:

  _Cyprus Mus. Cat._ 1393.

Footnote 2913:

  B.M. 506, 566, 588.

Footnote 2914:

  B.M. 106, 417.

Footnote 2915:

  B.M. 487.

Footnote 2916:

  B.M. 621.

Footnote 2917:

  B.M. 193; Kenner, No. 81.

Footnote 2918:

  Kenner, No. 82; B.M. 107.

Footnote 2919:

  _Mus. Alaoui_, Nos. 126-27; _Rev. Arch._ xxxiii. (1898), p. 229.

Footnote 2920:

  _Göttinger Nachrichten_, 1870, p. 182, No. 72.

Footnote 2921:

  B.M. 158, 589; Bartoli, ii. 24; _Ant. di Ercol._ viii. 33; _Guildhall
  Mus. Cat._ p. 48, No. 39.

Footnote 2922:

  B.M. 108; _Göttinger Nachrichten_, p. 188, Nos. 235-36.

Footnote 2923:

  _Mus. Alaoui_, No. 100.

Footnote 2924:

  B.M. 194 = _Arch. Zeit._ 1852, pl. 39.

Footnote 2925:

  _Mus. Alaoui_, Nos. 153-56.

Footnote 2926:

  _Ibid._ No. 123.

Footnote 2927:

  Kenner, Nos. 79, 80.

Footnote 2928:

  B.M. 371.

Footnote 2929:

  B.M. 590 = Roscher, _Lexikon_, iii. p. 2338.

Footnote 2930:

  Masner, _Wiener Vasens._ No. 674: cf. _Bull. Arch. Nap._ N.S. iv. pl.
  10, fig. 4.

Footnote 2931:

  B.M. 555; Von Rohden, _Terracotten von Pompeii_, p. 49: cf. _C.I.L._
  xv. 6236.

Footnote 2932:

  _Arch. Zeit._ 1865, pl. 194; B.M. 282: cf. 109, 195.

Footnote 2933:

  B.M. 319-321; Bartoli, iii. 11.

Footnote 2934:

  _Mus. Alaoui_, No. 192.

Footnote 2935:

  Masner, No. 676. Cf. a lamp with Athena voting for him, Daremberg and
  Saglio, _Dict._ iii. p. 1329, fig. 4601.

Footnote 2936:

  B.M. 199, 623.

Footnote 2937:

  _C.I.L._ x. 8053, 194.

Footnote 2938:

  _Mus. Alaoui_, No. 110; _Guildhall Mus. Cat._ p. 48, No. 41 =
  Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ ii. pl. 15 (from Colchester).

Footnote 2939:

  _Mus. Alaoui_, No. 111.

Footnote 2940:

  B.M. 196-198, 522, 622.

Footnote 2941:

  B.M. 130, 340, 418; Kenner, No. 136: cf. Masner, No. 686.

Footnote 2942:

  B.M. 524, 525; _Cyprus Mus. Cat._ 1351; Kenner, Nos. 68-70.

Footnote 2943:

  B.M. 682.

Footnote 2944:

  _Rev. Arch._ xxxiii. (1898), p. 230.

Footnote 2945:

  B.M. 110, 593: see Plutarch, _Vit. Alexandri_, 14.

Footnote 2946:

  _Mon. dell’ Inst._ iii. pl. 14, fig. 3; see Bernoulli, _Gr. Ikonogr._
  i. p. 56.

Footnote 2947:

  B.M. 128(?), 598; Kenner, Nos. 85-6, 88-90.

Footnote 2948:

  _Arch. Zeit._ 1861, _Anzeiger_, p. 157; Kenner, No. 87.

Footnote 2949:

  _Guildhall Mus. Cat._ p. 47, Nos. 14-15.

Footnote 2950:

  _C.I.L._ xi. 6699, 4.

Footnote 2951:

  _Bull. Arch. Nap._ iv. (1856), pl. 10, fig. 3, p. 166; examples also
  in B.M. (No. 216 = Plate LXIV. fig. 3) and _C.I.L._ xv. 6240. The
  companion lamp given in the _Bull. Arch. Nap._ pl. 10, fig. 4, does
  not represent Meliboeus, as there supposed, but Ajax.

Footnote 2952:

  B.M. 224; Roach-Smith, _Ill. Rom. Lond._ pl. 30, fig. 3; Jahn in
  _Mitth. d. ant. Gesellsch. zu Zürich_, xiv. pl. 4, fig. 9; _Göttinger
  Nachrichten_, 1870, p. 190, No. 282; and see Daremberg and Saglio,
  _s.v._ Lucerna, p. 1326.

Footnote 2953:

  B.M. 139: cf. _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1867, p. 35 = _Mitth. d. ant.
  Gesellsch. zu Zürich_, xvii. p. 149; in the latter instance a man
  weighs an ant against an elephant.

Footnote 2954:

  _Coll. H. Hoffmann_ (Paris, 1886), p. 39; and in B.M. (No. 59).

Footnote 2955:

  See for example _Ant. di Ercol._ viii. 7; _Rev. Arch_, xxxiii.
  (1898), p. 230; Daremberg and Saglio, _Dict._, ii., _s.v._ Gladiator,
  with the bibliography on p. 1600; also B.M., _passim_. Similar types
  occur on the Gaulish _terra sigillata_ (p. 507 below, and Déchelette,
  _Vases ornés_, ii. p. 97 ff.).

Footnote 2956:

  B.M. 111-114, 341, etc.

Footnote 2957:

  B.M. 115-117, 201, etc.

Footnote 2958:

  B.M. 121, 159, 160, 207, 285, 317, 342.

Footnote 2959:

  _Mus. Alaoui_, No. 222.

Footnote 2960:

  _Ant. di Ercol._ viii. 9.

Footnote 2961:

  _C.I.L._ xii. 5682, 74.

Footnote 2962:

  B.M. 558.

Footnote 2963:

  B.M. 318; _Rev. Arch._ xxxiii. (1898), p. 231, fig. 27.

Footnote 2964:

  B.M. 557, and cf. 165; 208, 531; 311 and _Cyprus Mus. Cat._ 1364. See
  under the first-named head, _Zeitschr. für Numism._ xxiv. p. 357, for
  an athlete placing a prize vase on his head.

Footnote 2965:

  B.M. 507; 122, 211, 422; 209, 210; 125, 213, 214.

Footnote 2966:

  B.M. 75, 123, 124, 154, 212, 421.

Footnote 2967:

  _C.I.L._ x. 8053, 127.

Footnote 2968:

  _Mus. Alaoui_, No. 223 = Daremberg and Saglio, iii. p. 1327, fig.
  4590.

Footnote 2969:

  Kenner, No. 98; _Mus. Alaoui_, No. 200.

Footnote 2970:

  _Cyprus Mus. Cat._ 1339.

Footnote 2971:

  B.M. 328: cf. _Cyprus Mus. Cat._ p. 80, No. 1365.

Footnote 2972:

  See B.M. 423, 424, 532, 533, 701; and cf. p. 415, note 2933.

Footnote 2973:

  _Mus. Alaoui_, Nos. 233-34; also B.M. 79. Cf. _B.M. Cat. of Bronzes_,
  No. 884.

Footnote 2974:

  _Mus. Alaoui_, No. 227; B.M. 625 (hunter only).

Footnote 2975:

  B.M. 126, 425; Kenner, Nos. 117-122.

Footnote 2976:

  B.M. 79 = Plate LXV. fig. 1; _Rev. Arch._ xxxiii. (1898), p. 230.

Footnote 2977:

  B.M. 217; _Rev. Arch._ xxxiii. (1898), p. 233; Urlichs, _Verzeichn.
  d. Antikens. d. Univ. Würzburg_, p. 39, No. 37.

Footnote 2978:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 6718.

Footnote 2979:

  Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ ii. pl. 15.

Footnote 2980:

  _Rev. Arch._ xxxiii. (1898), pp. 230, 231.

Footnote 2981:

  B.M. 534, 218, 219: cf. Kenner, Nos. 123-24.

Footnote 2982:

  Roach-Smith, _Ill. Rom. Lond._ pl. 30, fig. 4: cf. the well-known
  _graffito_ at Pompeii, and _Collect. Antiq._ iv. pl. 11.

Footnote 2983:

  B.M. 27; 222; 127; 74.

Footnote 2984:

  B.M. 215, 489; _Rev. Arch._ xxxiii. (1898), p. 230.

Footnote 2985:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 6221, 24.

Footnote 2986:

  _Ibid._ x. 8053, 126 and 192.

Footnote 2987:

  _Anzeiger_, 1889, p. 169.

Footnote 2988:

  Roach-Smith, _Ill. Rom. London_, pl. 30, 2.

Footnote 2989:

  _Göttinger Nachrichten_, 1870, p. 186, No. 182.

Footnote 2990:

  B.M., _passim_; Kenner, No. 139 ff.

Footnote 2991:

  _Mus. Alaoui_, No. 278.

Footnote 2992:

  B.M. 441, 494, 501; Masner, _Wiener Vasens._ No. 694; _Cyprus Mus.
  Cat._ 1379.

Footnote 2993:

  Kenner, No. 181.

Footnote 2994:

  _Ant. di Ercol._ viii. 23.

Footnote 2995:

  B.M. 560, 226, 561.

Footnote 2996:

  B.M. 562.

Footnote 2997:

  Fiedler, _Castra Vetera_, pl. 7, No. 2.

Footnote 2998:

  B.M. 544.

Footnote 2999:

  B.M. 135, 291, 563; _C.I.L._ x. 8053, 127.

Footnote 3000:

  B.M. 230, 493; _Guildhall Mus. Cat._ p. 49, No. 57; _Cyprus Mus.
  Cat._ 1341.

Footnote 3001:

  _Rev. Arch._ xxxiii. (1898), p. 232.

Footnote 3002:

  B.M. 234, 293, 439, 545; Kenner, Nos. 163-166.

Footnote 3003:

  B.M. 238-241, 296, 443, 444; Masner, No. 693.

Footnote 3004:

  _Ant. di Ercol._ viii. 5.

Footnote 3005:

  _Rev. Arch_. xxxiii. (1898), p. 232.

Footnote 3006:

  _Ibid._; B.M. 242, 295, 626.

Footnote 3007:

  B.M. 76, 82; Masner, Nos. 654-59.

Footnote 3008:

  B.M. 77: cf. 145.

Footnote 3009:

  Roach-Smith, _Ill. Rom. London_, p. 110.

Footnote 3010:

  See generally Dalton, _B.M. Cat. of Early Christian Antiqs._ p. 139
  ff.; Daremberg and Saglio, iii. p. 1328; _Mus. Alaoui_, Nos. 497 ff.;
  _Ant. di Ercol._ viii. 45-7; De Rossi, _Roma Sotterr._ ii. p. 498
  ff.; Delattre, in _Revue de l’Art Chrétien_, 1889-93, etc. (Carthage).

Footnote 3011:

  _C.I.L._ x. 8053, 36, 143, 193; B.M. 201, 310, from Pozzuoli.

Footnote 3012:

  _Guildhall Mus. Cat._ p. 47, No. 26.

Footnote 3013:

  See B.M. 189 and _C.I.L._ xv. 6211-18; these all date from the time
  of Augustus: cf. his coins and those of his successors.

Footnote 3014:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 6195.

Footnote 3015:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 6219.

Footnote 3016:

  _Ibid._ 6222.

Footnote 3017:

  See _ibid._ 6221; B.M. 164, etc.

Footnote 3018:

  _Ibid._ x. 8053, 4.

Footnote 3019:

  _Ibid._ xv. 6223.

Footnote 3020:

  _Ibid._ xiii. 10001, 4.

Footnote 3021:

  _Ibid._ xiii. 10001, 2.

Footnote 3022:

  _Inscr. Gr._ xiv. 2405, 6. This and the preceding are bronze lamps.

Footnote 3023:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 6239 = _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1866, pl. G.

Footnote 3024:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 6236.

Footnote 3025:

  _Ibid._ xi. 6699, 4.

Footnote 3026:

  _Ibid._ 6699, 5.

Footnote 3027:

  _Ibid._ xv. 6241-49.

Footnote 3028:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 6250: cf. Pliny, _H.N._ viii. 160.

Footnote 3029:

  _Ibid._ 6257, 6261.

Footnote 3030:

  Daremberg and Saglio, _Dict._, _s.v._ Lucerna, p. 1330.

Footnote 3031:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 6254-55.

Footnote 3032:

  _Ibid._ x. 8053, 8; xv. 6230: see above, p. 411.

Footnote 3033:

  _Ibid._ xv. 6234.

Footnote 3034:

  _Ibid._ x. 8053, 6.

Footnote 3035:

  _Ibid._ xi. 6699, 8-10.

Footnote 3036:

  _Ibid._ xiii. 10001, 14.

Footnote 3037:

  _Ibid._ 10001, 20.

Footnote 3038:

  _Ibid._ xv. 6232.

Footnote 3039:

  _Ibid._ viii. 10478, 1; xiii. 10001, 19. The meaning of _colatas_ is
  doubtful. Mr. F. H. Marshall suggests “well-made,” _lit._ “sifted,”
  referring to the quality of the clay.

Footnote 3040:

  _Ibid._ xv. 6752; xi. 6699, 7.

Footnote 3041:

  _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1868, p. 59: see Vol. I. p. 107.

Footnote 3042:

  _C.I.L._ ii. 4969, 1.

Footnote 3043:

  _Ibid._ xv. 6265: see _Arch. Zeit._ 1861, p. 167.

Footnote 3044:

  _Mélanges de l’École Franc. de Rome_, xii. (1892), p. 118, Nos. 31-3,
  pl. 4, No. 5; _C.I.L._ xv. 6520; _Mus. Alaoui_, No. 369; and see
  above, p. 420, for examples on Campanian lamps.

Footnote 3045:

  _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1880, p. 291.

Footnote 3046:

  Daremberg and Saglio, _Dict._, _s.v._ Lucerna, p. 1330.

Footnote 3047:

  _E.g._ A, B, C, H, I, R: _C.I.L._ x. 8053, 209-14; xii. 5682, 131;
  xv. 6266, 6334, 6342.

Footnote 3048:

  _C.I.L._ xii. 5682, 57.

Footnote 3049:

  See Fink in _Münchener Sitzungsberichte_, 1900, p. 690, for examples.

Footnote 3050:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 6282.

Footnote 3051:

  _Anzeiger_, 1889, p. 170 = _C.I.L._ xv. 6263.

Footnote 3052:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 6350, 6433.

Footnote 3053:

  _Ibid._ 6501-03.

Footnote 3054:

  _Ibid._ 6560-65.

Footnote 3055:

  _Ibid._ 6434, 6593.

Footnote 3056:

  See Daremberg and Saglio, _s.v._ Lucerna, p. 1331; also the lists
  given by Fink in _Sitzungsb. d. Münch. Akad._ 1900, pp. 689, 692 ff.,
  and the various volumes of the _Corpus_ under Instrumentum
  Domesticum, especially vol. xv.

Footnote 3057:

  Blanchet, _Mélanges Gallo-romaines_, ii. p. 112.

Footnote 3058:

  _C.I.L._ v. 8114, 54.

Footnote 3059:

  _Ibid._ xiii. 10001, 136; xii. 5682, 50; B.M. 383, 391.

Footnote 3060:

  _C.I.L._ xiii. 10001, 136.

Footnote 3061:

  _Ibid._: also Steiner, _Cod. Inscr. Rom. Danub. et Rheni_, i. p. 185,
  ii. p. 238.

Footnote 3062:

  _C.I.L._ vii. 1330, 15; Roach-Smith, _Ill. Rom. London_, p. 112;
  _Guildhall Mus. Cat._ p. 47, Nos. 27-8.

Footnote 3063:

  _C.I.L._ ii. p. 665, No. 24.

Footnote 3064:

  _Ibid._ iii. 3215, 7; _ibid._ Suppl. 1, 8076, 16.

Footnote 3065:

  _C.I.L._ ix. 6081, 33; x. 8053, 83; xi. 6699, 89; xv. 6450.

Footnote 3066:

  Daremberg and Saglio, _s.v._ p. 1332: cf. _C.I.L._ xv. p. 783.

Footnote 3067:

  From vol. v. of the _Corpus_ it may be seen how common the signatures
  peculiar to this class are in this region; _e.g._ 8114, 11, 28, 54,
  126, 137.

Footnote 3068:

  Carton, _Découvertes_, p. 254: cf. _C.I.L._ viii. 10478, 33-4.

Footnote 3069:

  _C.I.L._ x. 8053, 46; _Inscr. Graec._ xiv. 2405, 18. Cf. _Proc. Soc.
  Antiqs._ xx. (1904), p. 96.

Footnote 3070:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 6869, 6886.

Footnote 3071:

  Boeckh, _C.I.Gr._ iii. p. 660, No. 5685; _Inscr. Graec._ xiv. 24053,
  34; and B.M. 303.

Footnote 3072:

  _Inscr. Gr._ xiv. 2405, 35.

Footnote 3073:

  Cf. Cesnola, _Salaminia_, p. 284.

Footnote 3074:

  See _C.I.L._ iii. Suppl. 1, 7310, and Vol. I. p. 108. He also occurs
  in Africa (_C.I.L._ viii. 10478, 37) and elsewhere.

Footnote 3075:

  _Inscr. Graec._ xiv. 2574.

Footnote 3076:

  _Münchener Sitzungsberichte_, 1900, p. 685 ff. On p. 692 a table of
  signatures on the British Museum lamps is given.

Footnote 3077:

  See above, p. 400.

Footnote 3078:

  The names of this and other potters in Class IV. also occur on
  terracotta money-boxes (see above, p. 389).

Footnote 3079:

  See _C.I.L._ xv. pt. 2, pl. 3, No. 15.




                              CHAPTER XXI
         _ROMAN POTTERY: TECHNICAL PROCESSES, SHAPES, AND USES_

    Introductory—Geographical and historical limits—Clay and
      glaze—Technical processes—Stamps and moulds—_Barbotine_ and
      other methods—Kilns found in Britain, Gaul, and Germany—Use
      of earthenware among the Romans—Echea—Dolia and
      Amphorae—Inscriptions on amphorae—Cadus, Ampulla, and
      Lagena—Drinking-cups—Dishes—Sacrificial vases—Identification
      of names.


                            1. INTRODUCTORY

Roman vases are far inferior in nearly all respects to Greek; the
shapes are less artistic, and the decoration, though not without merits
of its own, bears the same relation to that of Greek vases that all
Roman art does to Greek art. Strictly speaking, a comparison of the two
is not possible, as in the one case we are dealing with painted vases,
in the other with ornamentation in relief. But from the point of view
of style they may still be regarded as commensurable. Roman vases, in a
word, require only the skill of the potter for their completion, and
the processes employed are largely mechanical, whereas Greek vases
called in the aid of a higher branch of industry, and one which gave
scope for great artistic achievements—namely, that of painting.

It may perhaps be advisable to attempt some definition of the subject,
and lay down as far as possible historical and geographical limits
within which Roman pottery as a distinct phase of ancient art may be
said to be comprised. The line which distinguishes it from Greek
pottery is, however, one of artistic evolution rather than of
chronology, one of political circumstances rather than of geographical
demarcation. In other words, it will be found that during a certain
period the ceramic art had reached the same stage of evolution
throughout all the Mediterranean countries; in Greece and Asia Minor,
in the Crimea and in North Africa, in Southern Italy and in Etruria, a
point of development had been reached at which the same kind of
pottery, of very similar artistic merit, was being made in all parts
alike. In Greece and other regions which had up to the end of the
fourth century, or even later, been famous for their painted pottery,
this art had lost its popularity and was dying or dead; in other parts,
as in Etruria, it had never obtained a very firm foothold, and the
local traditions of relief-ware imitating metal were revived. Not the
least remarkable feature of the art of the Hellenistic Age is the great
impetus given to working in metal, as has already been indicated in a
previous chapter (Vol. I. p. 498). The toreutic products of Alexandria
and of the famous chasers of Asia Minor, whose names Pliny
records,[3080] became renowned throughout the Greek world, and the old
passion for painted pottery was entirely ousted by the new passion for
chased vases of metal.

But in spite of increased habits of luxury, it is obvious that the
replacing of earthenware by metal could never have become universal.
For ordinary household purposes pottery was still essential, and
besides that, there were many to whom services of plate and gold or
silver vessels for use or ornament were a luxury unattainable. Hence it
was natural that there should follow a general tendency to imitate in
the humbler material what was beyond reach in the more precious, and
the practice arose, not only of adorning vessels of clay with reliefs
in imitation of the chased vases, but even of covering them with some
preparation to give them the appearance of metal. Instances of these
tendencies have been given in Chapter XI., and no better example could
be adduced than that of the silver phialae of Èze and their terracotta
replicas in the British Museum (Vol. I. p. 502).

In the same chapter we saw that Southern Italy, in particular, was the
home of the relief and moulded wares in the Hellenistic period. This
was a time when there were close artistic relations between that region
and Etruria, and we have already seen that this method of decoration
had long been familiar in the latter district (see p. 292 ff.). Hence
it is not surprising that we find springing up in the Etruscan region
of Italy an important centre of pottery manufacture which proved itself
to be the heir of more than one line of artistic traditions. The era of
Roman pottery is generally assumed to begin with the establishment at
Arretium, within the area of Roman domination, of a great manufactory
in the hands of Roman masters and workmen. Evidence points to the
second century B.C. as the time when Arretium sprang into importance as
a pottery-centre; and thenceforward for many years its fabrics filled
the markets and set the fashion to the rest of the Roman world.

The lower limit of the subject is, from lack of evidence, not much
easier to define; but after the second century of the Empire, pottery,
like other branches of working in clay, sank very much into the
background, and the spread of Christianity after the time of Diocletian
practically gave the death-blow to all Pagan art. M. Déchelette, in his
account of the important potteries at Lezoux in Gaul, brings forward
evidence to show that they practically came to an end about the time of
Gallienus (A.D. 260-268)[3081]; but it is probable that the manufacture
of degenerate _sigillata_ wares went on for about a century longer in
Germany at any rate, if not in Gaul. Much of the pottery found in
Germany and Britain is of an exceedingly debased and barbaric character.

In discussing the geographical distribution of Roman pottery we are met
first with the difficulty, which has already been hinted at, of
defining where Greek ends and Roman begins. But we must have regard to
the fact that in most if not all Greek lands pottery, painted or
moulded, was in a moribund condition, whereas in Italy the latter
branch was rejuvenescent. It seems, therefore, more satisfactory on the
whole to exclude the Eastern Mediterranean entirely from the present
survey, and to consider that with the concluding words of Chapter XI.
the history of pottery in that part of the ancient world came to an
end. That is to say, that all later fabrics found in Greece or Asia
Minor, even though they are sometimes of Roman date, belong to the
lingering traces of a purely Hellenic development, and have no bearing
on our present investigation.

The latter must therefore be limited to the countries of Western
Europe, embracing—besides Italy—France, Germany, Britain, and Spain.
The pottery found in these regions during the period of the Roman
Empire is homogeneous in character, though greatly varying in merit,
and so far as it can be traced to the victorious occupiers of those
countries rather than to purely native workmanship, represents what we
may call Roman pottery, as opposed to Greek or Graeco-Roman on the one
hand and Celtic or Gaulish on the other.

                         2. TECHNICAL PROCESSES

Roman pottery, regarded from its purely technical aspect, is in some
ways better known to us than Greek, chiefly owing to the extensive
discoveries of kilns, furnaces, and potters’ apparatus, such as moulds
and tools, in various parts of Western Europe. On the other hand, its
classification is a much more difficult matter, although it has for so
long been the subject of study, for reasons which will subsequently
appear. This is perhaps partly due to the overwhelming interest which
the discoveries of recent years have evoked in the study of Greek
vases; and partly, of course, to the artistic superiority and more
varied interest of the latter; but the mass of material now collected
in the Museums of Italy and Central Europe is gradually impelling
Continental scholars to bring to bear on Roman pottery the scientific
methods now universally pursued in other directions. Of their work we
shall speak more in detail in another chapter; for the present we must
confine ourselves to the technical aspect of the subject.

The Romans, who used metal vases to a far greater extent than the
Greeks—at least under the late Republic and Empire—did not hold the art
of pottery in very high estimation, and their vases, like their tiles
and lamps, were produced by slaves and freedmen, whereas at Athens the
potter usually held at least the position of a resident alien. These
were content to produce useful, but not as a rule fine or beautiful,
vases, for the most part only adapted to the necessities of life. There
was, so far as we know, no manufacture of vases set apart for religious
purposes, either for funerary use or as votive offerings, and for the
adornment of the house metal had the preference. It is not, therefore,
surprising that we should find them making use of a less fine and
compact paste for the greater proportion of their vases. With the
exception of the fine red wares with reliefs, which are now generally
known to archaeologists as _terra sigillata_,[3082] and which answered
in public estimation to our porcelain, they made only common
earthenware, and this was generally left unglazed.

All kinds of clays are used, varying with the different regions in
which the pottery was made, and ranging in hue from black to grey,
drab, yellow, brown, and red. In quality, too, the clay varies to a
considerable extent, some being of a coarse, pebbly character. The red
clay of the Allier district in France, where most of the Gaulish
pottery was manufactured, is of a ferruginous nature; its natural
colour is modified by baking, though it never becomes white.[3083] The
pottery of St. Rémy-en-Rollat in that neighbourhood is made of the same
white clay as the terracotta figures (p. 382).[3084] In Italy, as a
rule, careful attention seems to have been paid to the preparing and
mixing of the clay, and in the glazed red wares it is uniformly good.
In fact, the remarkable similarity in technique and appearance of this
ware throughout the Roman Empire has led to the view that there can
only have been one centre from which it was exported. Against this,
however, must be urged the undeniably provincial and almost barbarous
character of the decoration on much of the pottery found in Central and
Northern Europe; and therefore, without denying that exportation went
on, as it undoubtedly did, we should prefer to suppose that this red
glaze was produced in some special artificial manner, such as by using
red ochre or iron oxide (see below), the knowledge of which became
common property. As Semper said forty years ago[3085]: “Not only did
barbarians, Gauls, Britons, and Germans, learn to know and use Roman
technique, but also Egypt, Asia, and the Greeks, already immortalised
by their own pottery, dropped their local processes, and voluntarily
adopted Roman forms and technique.” Clay and glaze, form and technical
method, are in all parts the same; it is only the decoration that
varies and reflects the spirit and taste of the locality.

Formerly it was thought that the red glaze was obtained in the baking,
after careful polishing of the surface, and that special means were
adopted to this end. In the kilns of Castor (see below) Artis thought
that he detected contrivances for this purpose; but it is now generally
agreed that the glaze is artificial, not natural. In ordinary wares and
in the lamps a red glaze is produced by a mere polishing of the
surface, and this varies in tone and lustre with the proportion of
oxide of iron in the paste, and the degree of heat employed in the
baking. But in the _terra sigillata_ the red glaze reaches a high and
uniform state of perfection. This seems to have been produced by a kind
of varnish, the elements of which are not absolutely certain; but it
would appear that the substance added to produce the effect was of an
essentially alkaloid nature. This has been deduced by Dragendorff[3086]
from a series of analyses made from fragments of different wares, both
without and with the glaze; in the latter case the alkaloid
constituents show a marked increase in quantity, whereas the proportion
of the iron oxide and other elements remain constant. These
investigations were made by Dr. Lilienthal, of Dorpat, on five
fragments: (1) from a vase of the Republican period found at Corneto;
(2) from a bowl of fine _terra sigillata_ of the first century after
Christ; (3) from a deep cup of the same style; (4) from late provincial
ware of the second or third century; (5) from a degenerate fabric with
rough clay and inferior glaze, the results being as follows:—

1. Without glaze[3087]:

                                 (1)   (2)    (3)   (4)   (5)
           Silica              55·08 52·87 52·054 54·75 66·70
           Clay earth          23·10 23·95      — 18·82 21·01
           Iron oxide          14·13  4·78 13·966 14·48  5·89
           Carbonate of lime    5·22 13·80      —  5·30  3·20
           Magnesia             0·75  2·35  1·850  3·38  1·26
           Potash               0·79  0·89  1·852  1·55  1·02
           Carbonate of sodium  0·28  0·45  0·523  0·53  0·57

2. With glaze[3088]:

                                  (1)  (2)    (3)   (4)  (5)
            Silica              54·18    — 51·924 53·70    —
            Clay                21·31    —      — 16·93    —
            Iron                15·00    — 12·168 14·70    —
            Carbonate of lime    6·01    —      —  5·82    —
            Magnesia             1·94 3·12  2·201  5·72 2·05
            Potash               0·95 1·06  2·210  1·82 1·27
            Carbonate of sodium  0·37 0·49  0·921  0·62 0·69

It must be borne in mind that, although the final effect is due to the
alkaloids, the red colour of the vases is produced by the iron oxide
which was inherent in the composition of the clay, none being added
with the varnish, as the quantities show. All the fragments also showed
traces of manganese and sulphuric acid. Previously analyses had been
given by Brongniart and Blümner,[3089] with results approximately
similar, but not so definite. Fabroni had thought that the iron oxide
was combined with a vitreous paste,[3090] and Keller, by practical
experiments, essayed to show that borax was employed to provide the
required appearance,[3091] and further maintained that the furnace at
Castor already alluded to was used for dissolving that substance. He
was not far from the truth, but the results obtained by Dragendorff
seem to militate against his conclusions.

In any case the glaze is very perfect, of so bright a red as to
resemble coral, and serving, as Blümner says, to enhance the ground
colour where a modern glaze would only conceal its imperfect tone. It
is so fine and so carefully laid on that it does not interfere with any
outlines or details, in this again evincing its superiority to modern
glaze. It seems to have been applied not with the brush, but by dipping
the vase into the liquid.[3092] Black glaze, such as occurs on the
earlier Italian fabrics (p. 481), was produced from an alkaline
silicate.[3093]

The ordinary unglazed wares were classified by Brongniart under four
heads[3094]: (1) pale yellow; (2) red (dark red to red-brown; first
century of Empire); (3) grey or ash-coloured (down to the end of the
Western Empire); (4) black (mainly provincial). This distribution was
in its general lines adopted by subsequent writers, such as
Buckman[3095] and Birch, but was felt to be inadequate, and some slight
modifications were adopted. For practical purposes, however, it will be
found to work fairly well as a convenient method of grouping the
commoner wares. None of them as a rule have any decoration. They will
be considered in fuller detail in a subsequent chapter.

                  *       *       *       *       *

In the manufacture of vases the Romans used the same processes as the
Greeks. They were made on the wheel (_rota figularis_ or
_orbis_),[3096] to which allusion is not infrequently made by the Latin
poets, as in the well-known line of Horace[3097]:—

                              Amphora cepit
                Institui; currente rota cur urceus exit?

And, again, in the phrase _totus, teres, atque rotundus_[3098] he is
doubtless referring to a vase just turned off the wheel. Tibullus
speaks of “slippery clay fashioned on the wheel of Cumae”[3099]; and
there are also allusions in Plautus and other writers.[3100] The simile
has also been drawn upon by English poets.[3101] Specimens of potters’
wheels have been found at Arezzo and at Nancy; these are made of
terracotta, pierced in the centre for the axis of the pivot, and
furnished at the circumference with small cylinders of lead, to give
purchase for the hand and steadiness to the whirling wheel.[3102]
Another from Lezoux, now in the Museum at Roanne, is figured by M.
Déchelette.[3103] Most of the common wares were made by this process,
except the _dolia_, or large casks, which were built up on a frame like
the Greek pithos (Vol. I. p. 152).

But for the ornamented vases with reliefs an additional process was
necessary in order to produce the raised ornament, and they were in
nearly all cases produced from moulds, like the lamps or terracotta
figures and reliefs.[3104] The vases were still fashioned on the wheel,
but this was done in the mould from which the reliefs were obtained.
Occasionally the reliefs were modelled by hand or with the aid of
tools, or even produced with a brush full of thick slip (_en
barbotine_), but moulding was the general rule. This method entailed
three distinct stages, of which the first alone required artistic
capacity; the other two were purely mechanical, requiring only a
certain technical dexterity. The first was that of making the stamps
from which the designs were impressed; the second, the making of the
moulds; the third, impressing the clay in the mould.

The stamps were made of clay, gypsum, wood, or metal, and had a handle
at the back for holding while pressing them into the mould; they were
used not only for figures and ornamental designs, but also for the
potter’s signature (see below). Only clay examples, however, have been
preserved, but some of these are admirable specimens. Frequently the
subjects on the Arretine vases were taken, like those on lamps and
mural reliefs, from existing works of art, especially from the “new
Attic” reliefs to which allusion has already been made (p. 368), and
the stamps are directly copied from these sources. An instance of this
is a stamp from Arezzo in the British Museum, with a beautiful figure
of Spring (Plate LXVI. fig. 2), which finds its counterpart on a
complete vase from Capua (Fig. 219), and also on a mural relief (B.M. D
583). Another good example in the same collection represents a slave
bending over a vessel on a fire, and shielding his face from the heat
with one hand. From the same site are two others representing
respectively a boar and a lion. A fourth stamp found at Arezzo, with a
tragic mask, is given in Fig. 211.[3105] The stamps must have been
articles of commerce, and handed down from one potter to another, as
the subjects are found repeated in different places; the majority were
probably made at Arezzo and other important places in Italy.

Among examples from the provinces may be mentioned one in the British
Museum (Romano-British collection), with the figure of a youth,
inscribed OFFI(_cina_) LIBERTI; it is of fine terracotta, and was found
at Mainz. A stamp with the figure of Paris or Atys is in the museum of
the Philosophical Society at York.[3106] Other stamps in the form of a
hare and a lion in the Sèvres Museum are inscribed with the name of
Cerialis, a well-known German potter, whose name also occurs on a mould
for a large bowl with a frieze of combatants in the British Museum, and
in the former museum are six others, including one of a wolf, with the
name of a Gaulish potter, Cobnertus.[3107] Von Hefner mentions one
found at Rheinzabern with a figure of a gladiator at each end,
inscribed P · ATTI · CLINI · O(_fficina_), and others from Westerndorf
with a lion and a horse.[3108] Dies for stamping the potters’ names
have been found at Lezoux in Auvergne, and in Luxemburg, with the names
of Auster (AVSTRI · OF) and Cobnertus, and Roach-Smith possessed one
with the latter name[3109]; in the Sèvres Museum is also a stamp for
making rows of pattern (see below),[3110] and at Rheinzabern one for an
egg-and-tongue moulding was found.[3111] Specimens of these stamps are
given in Fig. 211.

[Illustration: FIG. 211. STAMPS USED BY ROMAN POTTERS.]

The moulds were made of a somewhat lighter clay than that of the vases,
but it was essential that the material should be sufficiently porous to
absorb the moisture of the pressed-in clay of the vase; sometimes holes
for the water to escape through are visible. They were made on the
wheel, and had a ridge on the exterior for convenience in handling;
they were made whole, not in halves, but sometimes the vase was first
made plain, and the figures were then attached from separate moulds, or
rather made separately, as in the case of the “Megarian” bowls (Vol. I.
p. 499).[3112] Vases have been found in the Rhone valley ornamented
with large _appliqué_ medallions, and the separate moulds for these
also exist; they seem to have been made at Vienne.[3113] The figures
and ornaments were impressed into the moulds from the stamps while the
paste was still soft, leaving hollow impressions to receive the clay of
the vases. Similarly, continuous patterns, such as rows of beads or
dots, were traced in the mould with a roller or wheel-like instrument
on which the pattern was cut in relief.[3114] Any defects or careless
arrangement in the completed vase would of course be due to a careless
insertion of the stamps in the mould.

There are large numbers of moulds for Roman and provincial vases in
existence,[3115] and the British Museum has a fine though fragmentary
series from Arezzo, intended for some of the finest specimens of the
local ware; of these more will be said in the following chapter. Many
of these moulds have been found on sites of potteries in Gaul,
especially in the Auvergne and Bourbonnais districts, and are collected
in the Moulins, Roanne, St. Germain, and other museums. Lezoux was an
important centre in this respect, and here also were found moulds for
patterns and ornaments.[3116] In the British Museum (Romano-British
collection) there is part of a mould for a shallow bowl, found at
Rheinzabern, with stamped designs of a lion, boar, and hare pursuing
one another; it is similar to the mould with Cerialis’ name already
described. These _matrices_ are usually of fine bright red clay,
unglazed; they are very porous, rapidly absorbing moisture, and easily
allowing the potter to withdraw the vessel from the mould. The
importance of the discovery of moulds can hardly be overrated for the
evidence they afford as to the site of potteries and centres of
fabrics[3117]; it is obvious that where they are found, and only in
such places, the vases must have been made; and that the discovery of a
potter’s name on any mould establishes his workshop at the place where
it was found. Various tools for working the moulds, or touching up
details or damaged parts of bronze and ivory, have been found on the
sites of ancient potteries,[3118] as at Arezzo, but their use cannot be
accurately determined.

The method of decoration known as _en barbotine_, which is a sort of
cross between painting and relief, was achieved by the laying on of a
semi-liquid clay slip with a brush, a spatula, or a small tube. The
pattern was probably first lightly indicated, and the viscous paste was
then laid on in thick lines or masses, producing a sort of low relief.
The process was, as a rule, only employed for simple ornamentation,
such as leaves, sprays, and garlands; but on the provincial black wares
it finds a freer scope. On vases found in Britain and the adjoining
parts of the Continent (p. 544) figures of animals are rendered in this
manner, and on another class peculiar to Germany (p. 537) inscriptions
are painted in a thick white slip. The colour of the slip did not
necessarily correspond to the clay of the vase, and was, in fact,
usually white. These vases are, however, technically poor, and the
reliefs heavy and irregular. The process has been aptly compared to the
sugar ornamentation on cakes.[3119]

Painted decoration is almost unknown in Roman pottery, and is, in fact,
confined to the POCOLOM series described in Chapter XI. It occurs in a
rough and primitive form on some of the provincial fabrics, such as the
Castor and Rhenish vases (see pp. 537, 544), but its place is really
taken by the _barbotine_ method.

Engraved or incised decoration is exceedingly rare, and practically
confined to provincial wares, which sometimes have incisions or
undulations made over the surface with the fingernail in the moist
clay.[3120] In the north of England, as at York, pottery is commonly
found with wreaths and fan-patterns cut in _intaglio_ in the clay while
moist. Others have patterns of four leaves 20[19]four-leaf cut in the
soft clay, or continuous ornaments round the vase made with the toothed
roller-like instrument of which we have already spoken. Some of this
ornamentation may be in imitation of contemporary glass vases. M.
Déchelette has traced this fabric to Lezoux,[3121] and the specimens
found in Britain are doubtless imported. A Gaulish example from the
Morel Collection in the British Museum is given on Plate LXIX. fig. 4.

The feet and rims of the vases were made separately, and attached after
their removal from the wheel, as were also the handles when required;
but the rarity of handles in Roman pottery is remarkable. It is perhaps
due to the difficulty of packing them safely for export. The next
process was the preparation of the glaze, for those vases to which it
was applied, followed by the baking.

                       3. ROMAN POTTERY-FURNACES

The remains of pottery-kilns and furnaces discovered in various parts
of Europe have furnished a considerable amount of valuable information
on the system employed in baking the vases. On this particular point,
indeed, we know far more in regard to Roman pottery than to Greek,
although, as we have seen in Chapter V., the painted vases themselves
sometimes yield information on the appearance and arrangement of the
furnaces. But remains of actual furnaces have been found in many places
in Western Europe, notably in Germany, France, and Britain, in a more
or less complete state, as also in Italy, at Pompeii, Modena, and
Marzabotto.[3122] A complete list of those known in 1863 has been given
by Von Hefner,[3123] supplemented by Blanchet’s lists of furnaces found
in France (1898 and 1902).[3124] In Gaul the best examples are at
Lezoux, near Clermont, at Châtelet in Haute-Marne,[3125] and at
Belle-Vue, near Agen, in the Department of Lot-et-Garonne.[3126] The
latter was circular in form, below the level of the soil. In Germany
important remains have been found at Heiligenberg in Baden, Heddernheim
near Frankfort, Rheinzabern near Karlsruhe, and Westerndorf.[3127] All
these in general arrangement differ little from those in use at the
present day; the Heddernheim furnace (Fig. 212) was found in the most
perfect preservation, but was subsequently destroyed, not, however,
before satisfactory plans and drawings had been made.[3128] In Britain
by far the most important discoveries have been made at Castor,
Chesterton, and Wansford in Northants, where the remains extend for
some distance along the Nene valley.[3129] They were first explored by
Artis in 1821-27, who published a magnificent series of plates in
illustration, entitled _Durobrivae_; these he supplemented by a full
description in the _Journal_ of the British Archaeological
Association.[3130] Castor and Chesterton (the latter in Hunts) are both
on the site of Roman towns, and were the centres of a special local
ware, described in a succeeding chapter. The potteries, being so
numerous, are probably not all of the same age.

[Illustration: FIG. 212. ROMAN KILN FOUND AT HEDDERNHEIM, GERMANY.]

In 1677 four Roman kilns were discovered in digging under St. Paul’s
Cathedral for the foundation of Sir C. Wren’s building, at a depth of
26 feet. They were made of loam, which had been converted into brick by
the action of the fires, and were full of coarse pots and dishes; they
measured 5 feet each way. A drawing made at the time is preserved among
the Sloane MSS. in the British Museum.[3131] In the kilns was found
pottery of the kind typical of London and the neighbourhood. In 1898
two kilns, one of large size, with pottery bearing the name CASTVS
FECIT, were found near Radlett in Herts,[3132] and another was
excavated in 1895 by Mr. C. H. Read at Shoeburyness.[3133] In Norfolk a
kiln of somewhat curious form was found in the Roman settlement of
Caistor by Norwich; the shape is that of a shallow concave depression
with partitions, and it contained vases placed ready for baking.[3134]
Another found between Buxton and Brampton was recorded by Sir Thomas
Browne,[3135] and a third at Weybourne.[3136] In the South of England
kilns have been found in the New Forest, where there was a manufacture
of local pottery[3137]; in Alice Holt Forest near Petersfield, Hants;
at Shepton Mallet in Somerset; and a potter’s workshop at Milton Abbas,
Dorset.[3138] The British Museum contains a model of a kiln unearthed
at Worcester about forty years ago, on the site of the modern porcelain
works. Finally, discoveries of kilns and pottery were made in 1819 at
Colchester, and again in 1878, when five kilns, all of different forms,
with local pottery, came to light.[3139]

To describe all these different types of furnaces in detail would of
course be impossible, but much may be learnt from the very full, though
now somewhat antiquated, descriptions of the Castor kilns given by
Artis.[3140] It will be found more satisfactory to describe the
generally-prevailing arrangements, noting the more important variations
where they occur. It may further be laid down that the system was
practically the same for terracotta figures and tiles as for pottery,
and that in many cases both were made in the same furnace. But this was
not invariably the case, and at Rheinzabern, for instance, the kilns
for tiles were quadrangular, those for pottery circular.

The kilns were constructed partly of burnt, partly of unburnt brick,
the interior, floor, and outside of the roofs being covered with a
strong layer of cement. They consisted of two main portions, the
fire-chamber with its adjuncts, and the vaulted chamber above, in which
the objects to be baked are placed. The fire-chamber was usually
circular, with a projection in front, the _praefurnium_[3141] which had
either a vaulted roof, as at Castor and Heiligenberg, or a gabled roof
formed of pairs of tiles, as at Rheinzabern. Through this the fuel was
introduced, consisting chiefly, as charcoal remains show, of pine-wood.
The fire-chamber was either divided up, as at Castor, by walls
radiating from a central pillar which supported the roof, or by rows of
pillars in a line with the entrance, as at Rheinzabern and
Heiligenberg. Holes were bored in the roof to allow the heat to
penetrate through, but the arrangement varies; at Heiligenberg each
division of the furnace was vaulted, making grooves along which the
holes were bored. The oven where the pots were placed has been
destroyed in most cases, but we know that it consisted of a floor, a
wall with entrances, and a vaulted dome. The pots were ranged partly on
the floor, partly on terracotta stands over the holes, as at
Rheinzabern and Heiligenberg[3142]; at Lezoux there are remains of
holes in the walls for iron bars to support them. Special arrangements
seem to have been made for baking the finer wares, in order to ensure
the proper spread of heat, and to guard against their being blackened
or otherwise injured. In the Romano-British Room of the British Museum
is a lump of bowls of red ware from Lezoux, fused together in the
baking and cast aside.[3143]

One of the kilns at Castor (Fig. 213) is described by Artis as a
circular hole 3 to 4 feet deep and 4 feet in diameter, walled round to
a height of 2 feet; the _praefurnium_ was about a foot in length. In
the centre of the circular hole was an oval pedestal (with one end
pointing to the furnace-mouth), on which and on the side wall the floor
was supported, being formed of perforated angular bricks meeting in the
centre. The vaulted dome was composed of bricks moulded for the
purpose,[3144] and the sides of the kiln of curved bricks set edgeways
in a thick slip of the same material. Brongniart[3145] compares the
Castor kiln with that at Heiligenberg, near Strasburg, and others in
the Rhine valley in which “Samian” ware was made.

[Illustration: FIG. 213. KILN FOUND AT CASTOR, NORTHANTS.]

Another kiln found in 1844 Artis describes as having been “used for
firing the common blue or slate-coloured pottery, and had been built on
part of the site of one of the same kind, and within a yard and a half
of one that had been constructed for firing pottery of a different
description. The older exhausted kiln ... presented the appearance of
very early work; the bricks had evidently been modelled with the hand,
and not moulded, and the workmanship was altogether inferior to that of
the others, which were also in a very mutilated state; but the
character of the work, the bricks, the mouths of the furnaces, and the
oval pedestals which supported the floors of the kilns, were still
apparent.”

Artis was also of opinion that “the blue and slate-coloured vessels
found here in such abundance were coloured by suffocating the fire of
the kiln, at a time when its contents had acquired a degree of heat
sufficient to ensure uniformity of colour.” Hence he denominated kilns
in which this ware was baked, “smother kilns.” He further notes that
the bricks of this kiln “were made of clay mixed with rye in the chaff,
which being consumed by the fire [_i.e._ in the baking of the bricks]
left cavities in the room of the grains, which might have been intended
to modify expansion and contraction, as well as to assist the gradual
distribution of the colouring vapour. The mouth of the furnace and top
of the kiln were no doubt stopped; thus every part of the kiln was
penetrated with the colouring exhalation.” From experiments made on the
local clays he proved to his own satisfaction that the colour could not
have been produced by any metallic oxide, inherent or applied from
without; and this view was supported by the appearance of the clay
wrappers of the dome of the kiln. But in view of recent researches,
such as those of Blümner, it is doubtful whether Artis’ theories can
now be upheld. As Mr. Haverfield has pointed out,[3146] the dark colour
may be due to the chemical action of the carbonaceous vapour of the
smothered kiln rather than to any “colouring exhalation.”

The process of packing the kiln in order to secure uniform heat in
firing is thus described by the same writer: “The kilns were first
carefully loose-packed with the articles to be fired, up to the height
of the side walls. The circumference of the bulk was then gradually
diminished, and finished in the shape of a dome. As this arrangement
progressed, an attendant seems to have followed the packer, and thinly
covered a layer of pots with coarse hay or grass. He then took some
thin clay, the size of his hand, and laid it flat on the grass upon the
vessels; he then placed more grass on the edge of the clay just laid
on, and then more clay, and so on until he had completed the circle. By
this time the packer would have raised another tier of pots, the
plasterer following as before, hanging the grass over the top edge of
the last layer of plaster, until he had reached the top, in which a
small aperture was left, and the clay nipt round the edge; another
coating would be laid on as before described. Gravel or loam was then
thrown up against the side wall where the clay wrappers were commenced,
probably to secure the bricks and the clay coating. In consequence of
the care taken to place grass between the edges of the wrappers, they
could be unpacked in the same-sized pieces as when laid on in a plastic
state, and thus the danger in breaking the coat to obtain the contents
of the kiln could be obviated.”

In the course of his excavations Artis discovered a singular
furnace,[3147] “of which I have never before or since met with an
example. Over it had been placed two circular earthen fire vessels (or
cauldrons); that next above the furnace was a third less than the
other, which would hold about eight gallons. The fire passed partly
under both of them, the smoke escaping by a smoothly-plastered flue,
from seven to eight inches wide. The vessels were suspended by the rims
fitting into a circular groove or rabbet, formed for the purpose.” He
was strongly of opinion that this furnace was used for producing glazed
wares by means of iron oxide. Whether this is so or not, it is
interesting to note that in the British Museum and Museum of Geology
there are cakes of vitreous matter from Castor, probably used as a
glaze, and consisting of silicates of soda and lime.[3148]

The kiln found at Caistor, in Norfolk, was apparently used for baking
the grey Roman ware, and differed in form from those described, which
were for the black, being only calculated for a slight degree of
baking. It was a regular oval, measuring 6 feet 4 inches in breadth.
The furnace holes were filled in below with burnt earth of a red
colour, and in the upper part with peat; the exterior was formed of
strong blue clay of 6 inches in thickness, and the interior lined with
peat; the kiln was intersected by partitions of blue clay. Some of the
vases were inverted and filled with a core of white sand.[3149]

[Illustration: FIG. 214. PLAN OF KILN AT HEILIGENBERG.]

The furnaces at Heiligenberg and Rheinzabern present the following
further peculiarities.[3150] The former, which were evidently used for
the baking of red wares, had a flue in the form of a long channel with
arched vault, the mouth being over 8 feet from the space where the
flames and heat were concentrated under the oven (Fig. 214). Numerous
pipes of terracotta, of varying diameter, diverged from the upper part
or floor of the oven, to distribute the heat; in the outer wall of the
oven was a series of smaller ones, and twelve or fifteen of larger size
opened under the floor of the oven to distribute the heat and flame
round the pots (Fig. 215). The mouths of the pipes were sometimes
stopped with baked clay stoppers to moderate the heat. The upper part
or dome of the kiln is never found entire, having been generally
destroyed here, as elsewhere, by the superincumbent earth. Walls of
strong masonry separated and protected the space between the mouth of
the flue and the walls of the oven, and the floor of the latter was
made of terracotta tiles.

[Illustration: FIG. 215. SECTION OF KILN AT HEILIGENBERG.]

At Rheinzabern, where excavations were made in 1858, fifteen furnaces
were found, some round and others square, but all constructed on the
same plan. The floor of the oven was over 3 feet below the top of the
walls, and was covered with tiling, the walls being formed of rough
slabs of clay, about 28 by 16 inches in size. The floors of the ovens
were in some cases supported by bricks covered with a coating of clay.
Stands of baked clay in the shape of flattened cylinders supported the
pots in the oven, and these rested on pads of a peculiar form, roughly
modelled in clay.[3151] In all, seventy-seven pottery-kilns and
thirty-six tile-kilns were discovered on this site.[3152]

The following list, though by no means claiming to be exhaustive, gives
the names of the chief potteries where actual furnaces have been
discovered.

                                1. ITALY

 Arezzo                    See p. 479 ff.
 Marzabotto                _Mon. Antichi_, i. p. 282.
 Modena                    _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1875, p. 192.
 Oria                      _Ibid._ 1834, p. 56.
 Pompeii                   Mau-Kelsey, _Pompeii_, p. 386.
 Pozzuoli                  _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p. 54.

                               2. FRANCE

 Dept. Ain             St.-Martin-du-  Blanchet, _Melanges_, p. 107.
 of                    Mont

       Allier          Champ-Lary      Blanchet, p. 89.

                       Lubié               ”      p. 95.

                       St.-Bonnet          ”      p. 96.

                       St.-Didier-en-      ”      p. 96.
                       Rollat

                       St.-Rémy-en-        ”      p. 96; Déchelette, i.
                       Rollat          p. 41 ff.

                       Vichy           Blanchet, p. 95.

       Aube            Nogent-sur-         ”      p. 106.
                       Seine

       Aveyron         Graufesenque        ”      p. 97; Déchelette, i.
                                       p. 64 ff.

 Dept. Bouches-du-     Arles           Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._
 of    Rhône                           vii. p. 13.

                       Auriol          Blanchet, p. 98.

                       Marseilles         ”      p. 98.

       Charente        Jarnac             ”      p. 101.

                       Chez Ferroux       ”      p. 102.

       Eure-et-Loire   Chartres           ”      p. 104.

       Gard            Uzès               ”      p. 99.

       Haute-Garonne   Vieille-           ”      p. 101.
                       Toulouse

       Haute-Marne     Châtelet        Brongniart, _Traité_, i. p. 439.

       Haute-Saône     Luxueil         Blanchet, p. 107.

       Ille-et-Vilaine Redon              ”      p. 102.

       Indre-et-Loire  Nouâtre            ”      p. 104.

       Loire           Montverdun         ”      p. 96.

       Loire-          Herbignac          ”      p. 102.
       Inférieure

       Loire-et-Cher   Thoré              ”      p. 104.

       Lot             Cahors             ”      p. 100.

                       Mélines            ”      p. 101.

       Lot-et-Garonne  Agen               ”      p. 101; _Rev. Arch._
                                       xviii. (1868), pl. 23.

       Lozère          Banassac        Blanchet, p. 97; Déchelette, i. p.
                                       117.

       Nièvre          Chantenay       Blanchet, p. 96.

                       Gravier            ”      p. 96.

       Oise            Bois-Ibert         ”      p. 105.

                       Compiègne          ”      p. 104.
                       (Forest of)

                       Mont-de-Hermes,    ”      p. 105.
                       Beauvais

                       Sampigny           ”      p. 105.

       Orne            Chandai            ”      p. 103.

       Pas-de-Calais   Avesnes-le-        ”      p. 106.
                       Comte

       Puy-de-Dôme     Clermont-          ”      p. 95.
                       Ferrand

                       Lezoux             ”      p. 93; Déchelette, i. p.
                                       141 ff.

                       Thiers          Blanchet, p. 94.

       Rhône           Lyons              ”      p. 100.

       Sarthe          Grand-Lucé         ”      p. 103.

       Seine           Paris              ”      p. 104.

       Seine-          Incheville         ”      p. 103.
       Inférieure

       Somme           Amiens          Blanchet, p. 106.

       Tarn            Montans            ”      p. 97.

       Tarn-et-Garonne Castelnau-de-      ”      p. 97.
                       Montratier

                       Muret              ”      p. 97.

       Vendée          Trizay             ”      p. 102.

       Yonne           Sens               ”      p. 106.

[See also Blanchet, p. 90 ff. for sites of furnaces for terracotta
figures.]

                               3. GERMANY

 Alttrier, Luxemburg       Von Hefner, p. 60.

 Bergheim                  Blanchet, _Mélanges Gallo-rom._ ii. p. 108.

 Bonn                      _Bonner Jahrb._ lxxiv. p. 152; lxxxiv. p.
                           118.

 Cannstadt                 Von Hefner, p. 61.

 Cologne                   _Bonner Jahrb._ lxxix. p. 178.

 Commern                   _Ibid._ iv.   p. 203.

 Dalheim, Luxemburg        Von Hefner, p. 61.

 Dieburg                       ”      p. 61.

 Güglingen                 _Bonner Jahrb._ i. p. 74.

 Heddernheim               _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1882, p. 183.

 Heidelberg                _Bonner Jahrb._ lxii. p. 7.

 Heiligenberg              Brongniart, _Traité_, i. p. 427; Blanchet,
                           _Mélanges Gallo-rom._ ii. p. 108.

 Heldenbergen              _Westd. Zeitschr. für Gesch. u. Kunst_,
                           xviii. (1899), pl. 4, p. 227.

 Herbishofen               Von Hefner, p. 61.

 Nassenfels                    ”      p. 61.

 Petzel, Luxemburg             ”      p. 61.

 Rheinzabern                   ”      p. 61; Brongniart, i. p. 429.

 Riegel                    Von Hefner, p. 61.

 Rottenburg                _Bonner Jahrb._ iv. p. 141.

 Schönbuch, Würtemberg     Blanchet, p. 108.

 Trier                         ”      p. 108.

 Waiblingen                Von Hefner, p. 61.

 Westheim                      ”      p. 62.

 Westerndorf                   ”      p. 62.

                               4. ENGLAND

 Dorset, Milton Abbas                  Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ vi.
                                       p. 191.

 Essex, Ashdon                         _Arch. Journ._ x. p. 21.

    ”     Colchester                   Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ ii.
                                       p. 38, vii. pls. 1-3, p. 1 ff.;
                                       _Journ. Brit. Arch. Assoc._ xxxiii.
                                       p. 267.

    ”     Shoeburyness                 _Proc. Soc. Antiqs._ 2nd Ser. xvi.
                                       p. 40.

 Hampshire, Alice Holt Forest          _Vict. County Hist._ i. p. 306.

    ”     New Forest                   _Ibid._ p. 326.

 Hertfordshire, Radlett                _Proc. Soc. Antiqs._ 2nd Ser. xvii.
                                       p. 261.

 Huntingdon, Sibson and Water Newton   _Vict. County Hist. Northants_, i.
                                       p. 175.

 Kent, Upchurch                        Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ vi.
                                       p. 178; _Archaeologia_, li. p. 467.

 Lancashire, Warrington                _Reliquary_, 1900, p. 263.

 Middlesex, London (St. Paul’s)        Roach-Smith, _Ill. Rom. Lond._ p.
                                       79.

 Norfolk, Brampton                     _Vict. County Hist._ i. p. 314.

    ”     Caistor-by-Norwich           _Ibid._ p. 291; _Archaeologia_,
                                       xxxvi. p. 413.

    ”     Caistor-by-Yarmouth          _Journ. Brit. Arch. Assoc._, xxxvi.
                                       p. 206.

    ”     Weybourne                    _Vict. County Hist._ i. p. 322.

 Northants, Castor, Wansford, Bedford  _Vict. County Hist._ i. p. 166 ff.,
 Purlieus                              206 ff.

 Oxfordshire, Headington               _Journ. Brit. Arch. Assoc._ vi. p.
                                       60.

    ”     Littlemore                   _Ibid._ liv. p. 349.

 Somerset, Shepton Mallet              _Gentleman’s Mag._ 1864, ii. p.
                                       770.

 Suffolk, West Stow Heath              _Journ. Brit. Arch. Assoc._ xxxvii.
                                       p. 152.

 Worcester                             _Vict. County Hist._ i. p. 207 (a
                                       model in Brit. Mus.).

[On the subject generally reference may be made to Brongniart,
_Traité_, i. p. 426; De Caumont, _Cours d’ant. Monum._ ii. (for
Heiligenberg); Von Hefner, _Römische Topferei_, in _Oberbayr. Archiv
für vaterl. Gesch._ xxii. (1863), p. 60 (where a complete list of
furnaces up to date is given); _Bonner Jahrbücher_, lxii. 1878, p. 7
ff.; Wolff in _Westdeutsche Zeitschrift für Gesch. u. Kunst_, xviii.
(1899), p. 211 ff.; Blümner, _Technologie_, ii. p. 23 ff.; Smith,
_Dict. of Antiqs._ i. p. 845 (_art._ FICTILE); and for Gaulish sites,
Blanchet, _Mélanges Gallo-romaines_, ii. p. 93 ff.]

            4. POTTERY IN LATIN LITERATURE; SHAPES AND USES

Vessels of earthenware were extensively used by the Roman people in the
earlier days of the Republic for all purposes of domestic life,[3153]
and later writers often contrast their use with that of the costly
vases of precious metal then customary. “Gold,” says Persius, “has
driven away the vases of Numa and the brass vessels of Saturn, the urns
of the Vestals and Etruscan earthenware”[3154]; and Juvenal speaks of
those who laughed at “Numa’s black dish and bowl, and fragile saucers
from the Vatican hill.”[3155] Even under the Empire fictile vases
continued to be used by the poorer classes, and the use of the finer
red glazed wares must have been even more general. But Juvenal,
satirising the luxury of Domitian’s time, says that it is considered a
reproach to dine off earthenware.[3156] In Republican times it was the
proud boast of a Curius to prefer his earthenware service to Samnite
gold,[3157] and in 167 B.C. the consul Q. Aclius Tubero was found by
the Aetolian ambassador dining off earthenware[3158]; Seneca also tells
how he, at his entertainment given in the temple of Jupiter, placed
fictile vessels before his guests.[3159] But when Masinissa entertained
the Romans in 148 B.C. the first course was served on silver, the
second in golden baskets, which Ptolemy Euergetes describes
respectively as the Roman and Italian fashions.[3160] Athenaeus says
that up to Macedonian times dinners were served in fictile vessels, but
that subsequently the Romans became more luxurious, and Cleopatra spent
five minae a day on gold and silver wares.[3161] Subsequently
earthenware was replaced by glass as well as metal, especially for
unguent-bottles and drinking-cups, of which large numbers are found in
Roman tombs, where they virtually take the place of pottery. Vases of
immense size were sometimes made under the Empire, and stories are told
of the absurdities perpetrated by some of the Emperors in this respect.
Juvenal, in describing the turbot prepared for Domitian,[3162] says no
dish could be found of sufficient size to cook it in, and Vitellius had
a dish made which from its huge dimensions acquired the name of “the
shield of Minerva.”[3163] Elsewhere it is scoffed at as a “swamp of
dishes” (_patinarum paludes_).[3164] Pliny speaks of terracotta vases
which sold for even more than precious crystal or myrrhine ware,[3165]
and were therefore presumably of great size.

The principal use of earthenware was for the transport and storage of
wine, oil, corn, figs, honey, and other commodities, answering to the
casks of the present day. Martial speaks of a jar (_testa_) reddened
with the blood of tunnies exported from Antipolis (Antibes).[3166] Of
the shapes used for this purpose and their names we shall speak
presently in detail. Vases were also used in religious rites, but metal
was probably more general; Plautus describes a miser who sacrificed to
the Lares in earthenware (_vasis Samiis_) because he was afraid that
they might steal silver vessels.[3167] They were also used for various
operations in agriculture, medicine, and household economy; but above
all for the domestic purposes of the table. Some of the peculiar uses
have already been referred to (p. 387), and another that may be
mentioned is the use of jars as bell-glasses for rearing
vine-sprouts.[3168]

Although the custom of burying vases with the dead was not so general
among the Romans as among the Greeks, they were yet frequently used in
graves in the form of cinerary urns, in the shape of a covered jar
(_olla_ or _obrendarium_[3169]) of coarse ware and globular in form (p.
550). Vases containing ashes have often been found in England, as at
Bartlow and Litlington in Cambridgeshire.[3170] At the latter place a
tomb contained a sort of colander perforated with holes which formed
the letters INDVLCIVS.[3171] Similar finds are recorded from Arnaise in
France. Pliny states that many persons expressed their desire to be
buried in coffins of terracotta.[3172] Roman sarcophagi of terracotta
have been found at Saguntum in Spain, but for these stone and lead were
the ordinary materials. The cinerary urns were often formed from large
dolia or amphorae, the neck being broken off so as to produce a
globular vessel. Examples have been found in England at Chesterford,
Essex,[3173] at Southfleet in Kent,[3174] and in the Bedford Purlieus
near Kingscliffe, Northants (now at Woburn Abbey); another is in the
Cathedral Library at Lincoln.[3175] Roach-Smith also mentions specimens
found in Lothbury, London, and in Kent, the latter being now in the
Maidstone Museum.[3176]

Vitruvius, in his chapter on _Echea_, or vases distributed around the
ancient theatres for acoustic purposes, mentions that they were often
made of earthenware for economical reasons[3177]; but they were usually
of bronze. Seneca, too, alludes to this practice when he speaks of the
voice of a singer falling upon a jar (_dolium_).[3178] It is certain
that the Greeks and Romans often made use of earthenware jars in
architecture, but it is probable that this was more often done with the
object of diminishing weight than for acoustic reasons, or, as some
have thought, for want of better material. The _dolium_, _amphora_, and
_olla_ seem to have been the forms most usually employed. There are
various examples in walls and substructures of the Augustan period, and
they are also found in vaults, where their purpose is undoubtedly to
lighten the weight.[3179] In the circus of Maxentius a number of large
amphorae were found embedded in the vaulting and upper part of the
walls, arranged neck downwards and with their axis inclined obliquely
to the wall.[3180] All are now broken, but they illustrate the
ingenious method in which the upper parts of the arches supporting the
rows of seats were lightened. In the dome of the tomb of St. Helena,
outside the Porta Labicana, rings of pots are embedded for the same
purpose, whence the building is usually known as Torre Pignattara (from
_pignatte_, pots).[3181] An oven found at Pompeii had a vaulted top
formed of _ollae_ fitted into one another, each about a foot in height,
of ordinary red ware; the span of the arch was 5 feet 6 inches, and the
object here was to ensure extreme dryness as well as lightness.[3182] A
similar arrangement occurs in the Stabian Thermae at Pompeii, and also
in the church of San Stefano alla Rotonda at Rome, and the dome of San
Vitale at Ravenna, built by Justinian in the sixth century, is
similarly constructed, with an elaborate system of tubes and
jars.[3183] The practice seems to have been continued during the Middle
Ages, and an example occurs in England, at Fountains Abbey, where the
purpose was acoustic.[3184]

                  *       *       *       *       *

We now proceed to describe in detail the principal shapes of Roman
vases, so far as they can be identified from literary or epigraphical
evidence or from other sources, on the same lines as in our previous
chapter on the shapes of Greek pottery. Some of these shapes, it will
be seen, they had in common with the Greeks, such as the amphora, the
krater, and the phiale or patera, and in several instances (such as the
cyathus and the scyphus) the Greek name is preserved.

Beginning with vases used for storage, whether for liquids, as for wine
and oil, or for solids, as for corn or fruit, which were chiefly kept
in cellars, we take first the _dolium_, a gigantic cask corresponding
to the Greek p???? (Vol. I. p. 152), which from its general usage gave
rise to the generic term _opus doliare_, for common work in clay. It
was large enough to contain a man, as we know from the story of
Diogenes illustrated on the Roman lamp already given (Plate LXIV. fig.
6); the vessel thereon depicted may serve to give an idea of its
appearance. Columella[3185] speaks of _dolia sesquiculearia_, _i.e._
holding one-and-a-half _culei_ or thirty amphorae. They were buried in
the earth of the cellars, and have been found thus in Italy at Anzi, in
France at Apt, Vaucluse, and near Clermont, and at Tunis.[3186] They
were used for wine, oil, corn, and salted meat, and Juvenal tells us
that _dolia_ were used for new wine, being lined with wax, pitch, or
gypsum.[3187] In 1858 a large number were found at Sarno in Campania,
some being stamped with the makers’ names, as ONESIMVS FECIT, VITALIS
F, L · TITI · T · F · PAP, and M · LVCCEI · QVARTIONIS.[3188] On one
was incised L · XXXIV, or thirty-four _lagenae_ (see p. 446). One of
the prodigies which was supposed to predict the future fortune of the
Emperor Antoninus Pius was the discovery above ground of some _dolia_
which had been sunk in the earth in Etruria.[3189] An old name for the
_dolium_ was _calpar_,[3190] and another smaller variety was the
_seria_,[3191] containing only seven amphorae. A diminutive form of the
latter, _seriola_, is described as a wine-vessel invented in
Syria.[3192]

_Dolia_ were made in separate pieces, the base and other parts being
secured by leaden cramps, and they were also hooped with lead, as we
learn from Cato.[3193] Pliny speaks of repairing casks by fitting on
handles, scraping the hoops, and stopping up cracks.[3194] They are
made both of white and red clay, baked in a slow furnace, great care
being required to moderate the heat aright. Their makers were known as
_doliarii_. Part of a large _dolium_ bound with leaden hoops was found
near Modena, at Palzano; also at Spilamberto, one with the name of T.
Gavelius and the numerals XXX, XIII, another of the capacity of 36
amphorae.[3195] On the mouth of one found in the Villa Peretta at Rome
was the name of L. Calpurnius Eros,[3196] on another the name of T.
Cocceius Fortunatus.[3197] Two good examples of _dolia_ were at one
time preserved in the gardens of the Villa Albani, about 4 feet in
diameter and as many in height, and of a coarse gritty pale red clay.
This kind of vase was often used for sepulchral purposes, bodies having
being found actually buried in them (see above, p. 457).

Next in size and importance to the _dolium_ is the _amphora_,
resembling in form the Greek wine-jar[3198]; it usually has a long
cylindrical body with pointed base, a long narrow neck, and two
straight handles. Hölder[3199] notes several varieties: the Canopic,
the wide-bellied, the cylindrical, the globular, and the spheroidal,
the former of which is a typical early form in the provinces.[3200] It
was often without neck or handle, and was seldom ornamented, not being
used for artistic purposes like its Greek prototype, but only for
strictly utilitarian ends, that is, for the storage and transport of
wine. It is usually of coarse red earthenware, made on the wheel, with
a clay stopper to close the mouth, and the name of the maker in a
rectangular label on the handle, like the _diota_ or wine-amphora of
the Greeks. It was in fact often known as a diota, as in a familiar
line of Horace[3201]:

                      Deprome quadrimum Sabina,
                        O Thaliarche, merum diota.

The amphora was pitched internally to preserve the wine[3202]; the
pointed base was of course adapted for fixing it in the ground in the
cellar, but when brought up it was placed in a tripod-stand of metal or
wood (_incitega_).[3203] In Cicero’s time the regulation size was
equivalent to a quadrantal or two _urnae_.[3204] The use of this vase
was very varied and extensive among the Romans; it was employed not
only in cellars and granaries, but also at the table and for many other
purposes of ordinary life, even where nowadays vessels of wood or iron
would be preferred.

D’Agincourt[3205] mentions the discovery at Rome, near the Porta del
Popolo, of a row of amphorae in a cellar in 1789, and at Pompeii a
hundred were found in the house of Arrius Diomedes, a hundred and fifty
in that of the Faun; a hundred and twenty were found in a cellar near
the baths of Titus, and many more at Milan in 1809, and at Turin.
Numbers have been found in London, varying in capacity from four to
twelve gallons, and others at Colchester and Mount Bures in
Essex.[3206] But they are so universal all over the Roman Empire that
to enlarge the list would be tedious. Many, however, evoke a special
interest by reason of their stamps and inscriptions, and a few typical
examples may profitably be given.[3207]

The inscriptions vary in form and character; some amphorae give the
name of the maker in the genitive, _officina_ being understood; others
the consuls for the year in which they were filled; others, again, the
name of the wine or other phrases descriptive of their contents; and
others complimentary inscriptions to their owners. Among names of
makers both single, double, and triple names are found, and among the
former are many of a Gaulish or barbarian character, such as Bellucus,
Dicetus, and Vacasatus, son of Brariatus; the last-named from Nimeguen,
the first-named from London.[3208] Among the triple names, showing that
the potters were Roman citizens or freedmen, are M. Aemilius Rusticus
from Caerleon, and C. Antonius Quintus, also found in Britain.[3209]
Sometimes the name is in the nominative with F for _fecit_, or with the
genitive OF for _officina_ occurs. The stamps are in the form of oblong
rectangular labels on the handle or neck, the letters in relief. One of
the most curious stamps was on an amphora found in the Pontine marshes
near Rome, a square one with a caduceus and other symbols arranged in
twelve compartments; the inscription runs M · PETRON · VETERAN · LEO ·
SER · FECIT, “Leo, the slave of M. Petronius Veteranus, made it.”[3210]

The names of Vespasian and Titus as consuls are found on an amphora
from Pompeii: VESPASIANO III ET FILIO CS, the year being A.D. 74[3211];
that of M. Aurelius (but not necessarily as consul) occurs on an
amphora found at Newington in Kent[3212]; and on one in the British
Museum from Leptis in Africa is L · CASSIO · C · MARIO · COS, the date
being A.D. 107.[3213] On the neck of a fourth amphora, found at
Pompeii, was FVNDAN · CN · LENTVL · M · ASINIO · COSS, “wine of Fundi
in the consulship of Cn. Lentulus and M. Asinius (Agrippa),” of the
year A.D. 26.[3214]

The character or origin of the wine or other commodity stored in the
amphorae is given by such inscriptions as BARCAE, KOR · OPT (“best
Corcyrean”),[3215] RVBR · VET · [=V] · P CII (“old red wine, 102 lbs.
weight”), all from Pompeii, painted in red and black.[3216] MES · AM ·
XVIII, also on an amphora from Pompeii, appears to mean “eighteen
amphorae [not measures] of Mesogitan wine” (from Mesogis in
Lydia[3217]); or, again, we find at Pompeii SVRR · XXI, “twenty-one
amphorae of wine of Surrentum”[3218]; TOSCOLA(_n_)ON (_ex_) OFFICINA
SCAV(_ri_), “Tusculan wine from the manufactory of Scaurus.”[3219] On
the other hand, LIQVAMEN OPTIMVM (“best pickle”), or such expressions
as SCOMBRI (“mackerel”), GARVS (“brine”), etc., imply that the vessel
has been used for conveying pickled fish.[3220]

Among expressions of a complimentary nature are: FABRILES MARCELLAE N ·
AD FELICITATEM, “the workmen of our Marcella to wish her joy”[3221];
(_pr_)OMO(_s_) FAMELIAI DONO(_m_) V(_otum dedit_), or DONO V(_rnam
dat_), “Promus gave (an urn) as a gift and vow to his family” (from
Ardea in Latium).[3222] The list may be concluded with the inscription
on an amphora found in the garden of the Villa Farnese, among the ruins
of the Aurea Domus of Nero, which held eight _congii_; on its neck was
traced in ill-formed letters: L(_iquaminis_) FL(_os_) EXCEL(_lens_) L ·
PVRELLI GEMELLI M(...), “Finest brand of liquor, belonging to L.
Purellus Gemellus.”[3223] An amphora was found at Pompeii with the name
of Septimius or Stertinius Menodotus in Greek letters.[3224] There are
occasional references in the classics to the practice of placing such
stamps on vases, as when Plautus makes the slave say, with reference to
the drinking that went on in his master’s house, “There you may see
epistles written with letters in clay, sealed with pitch; the names are
there in letters a foot and a half long.”[3225] Or, again, another
slave, fearing to be caught with a jar in his possession, reflects,
“This jar is lettered; it proclaims its ownership.”[3226] Juvenal
speaks of wine whose country and brand had been obliterated by old age
through long hanging in the smoke.[3227]

Another vase used much in the same way as the amphora, and particularly
for keeping wine, was the _cadus_, the shape of which is not exactly
known. It held about twelve _congii_, or seventy-two _sextarii_
(pints), and is frequently mentioned by Horace and Martial.[3228] The
former in the _Odes_ refers to his jar of Alban wine nine years old,
and in another passage to one stored in Sulpicius’ cellars[3229]; the
latter speaks of _cadi Vaticani_, which may mean made of clay from the
Vatican hill or containing Vatican wines[3230]; elsewhere he speaks of
taking yellow honey from the ruddy jar (implying an earthenware
vessel), and of the red jar which pours out home-made wine.[3231] We
also learn from him that the _cadus_ was hung in the chimney to give
the wine a mellow flavour.[3232] From other passages we learn that the
_cadus_ was used for oil,[3233] fruit,[3234] and money,[3235] and also
as a measure equivalent to one-and-a-half amphorae or three
urnae.[3236] The _orca_ is described by Isidorus as a kind of amphora,
of which the _urceus_ (see below) was a diminutive.[3237]

The Romans were presumably, like the Greeks, in the habit of mixing
their wine with water, but we only find the _crater_ mentioned rarely,
and that in a poetical manner.[3238] Moreover it was probably made in
metal as a rule, and the rare instances of the _crater_ which occur in
the Arretine ware are obvious imitations of metal prototypes; there is
a fine example in the British Museum from Capua (see Fig. 219). Ovid,
however, speaks of the _rubens crater_,[3239] implying terracotta, as
in the case of the _rubens cadus_ of Martial mentioned above. The
_vinarium_,[3240] the _acratophorum_ (for holding unmixed wine),[3241]
and the _oenophorum_ were probably of the same character, but the
latter was portable, as we know from Horace’s jeer at the man who took
his cooking-stove and wine-jar (_oenophorum_) with him everywhere.[3242]

The _urna_, the equivalent of the Greek _hydria_, was similarly
used for carrying water, and also for casting lots, or as a
voting-urn[3243]; in the latter sense Cicero actually uses the word
_hydria_.[3244] Its size was half that of the amphora. Both the
_urna_ and the hydria are found in connection with funerary usages,
and appear to have held the ashes of the dead.[3245] The _situla_,
or bucket, with its diminutive _sitella_, was also used for water
and for lots,[3246] but was principally of metal. Isidorus says it
is the Greek ??d?? (Vol. I. p. 165).[3247] The _cupa_ and the
_cumera_ seem to have been of wood rather than earthenware[3248];
the former was a kind of tub, the latter was used for keeping
grain, and also by brides for conveying their effects to their new
home.[3249] Another large vessel for holding liquids was the
_sinus_, or _sinum_, used both for water and milk.[3250] The
_nasiterna_, so called from its long spout or _nasus_, had three
handles, and was used as a watering-pot.[3251] The _fidelia_
appears to have been a kind of large pail or bucket; Cicero in one
of his letters[3252] cites the proverb, _de eadem fidelia duos
parietes dealbare_, which answers to our “killing two birds with
one stone.” It implies that it would be used for holding paint or
whitewash.

Of smaller vases for holding liquids, such as jugs, bottles, and
flasks, the principal were the _urceus_ (with its diminutive
_urceolus_), the _ampulla_, and the _lagena_ or _lagona_. The _hirnea_
is also mentioned as a jug which was filled from the jar or
cadus.[3253] The _urceus_ seems to be a small jug, the equivalent of
the Greek ???????, having one handle; it was also used as a
measure.[3254] The _ampulla_ was used both as a wine-flask and an
oil-flask, corresponding thus to the Greek ???????, as is seen in its
metaphorical use.[3255] It was used for bringing the wine to table,
like a decanter,[3256] and is described by Apuleius[3257] as lenticular
in form, being therefore like a flat round-bodied flask with two
handles.

[Illustration: FIG. 216. AMPULLA (BRITISH MUSEUM).]

An interesting example of an _ampulla_ of this kind, of red ware with a
coarse reddish-brown glaze was found some years ago near the Hôtel
Dieu, Paris.[3258] It bore two inscriptions round the body, one on
either side, with letters in relief; on one side was OSPITA REPLE
LAGONA CERVESA, “Mine host, fill the flask with beer”; on the other,
COPO CNODI TV ABES EST REPLETA, “Innkeeper, (?), be off, it is full.”
Similar vases have been found in Hainault and at Trier, and are said to
be still made in Spain. Another of the same kind, but with only one
handle, recently acquired by the British Museum from the Morel
collection, has on it the word AMPULLA painted in white (Fig. 216). The
_lagena_ (Greek, ???????) was a jug or bottle with narrow neck, wide
mouth, and handle, and was used as a sign by wine-sellers.[3259] It was
sealed up until required for use,[3260] and being proverbially brittle,
was protected, like a modern Italian wine-flask, by wicker-work.[3261]
It was also used as a travelling-flask, and carried by hunters and
fishermen[3262]; the younger Pliny exhorts Tacitus, when he goes
hunting, to take not only a “sandwich-box and brandy-flask” (_panarium
ac lagunculam_), but also a notebook to jot down ideas.[3263] The Roman
barmaid carried a _lagena_ at her side when serving in the
tavern,[3264] and it was used as a wine-jug at the table.[3265] A jar
found at Saintes in France has engraved on it MARTIALI SOL(_i_)DAM
LAGONAM, “A whole flask to Martialis,”[3266] and gives a clue to the
form associated with this word (see Fig. 217).

[Illustration: FIG. 217. LAGENA FROM FRANCE, INSCRIBED.]

The words in use for a ladle are _cyathus_, corresponding to the Greek
??a??? (Vol. I. p. 179),[3267] in measure equivalent to one-twelfth of
the sextarius or pint, and _simpulum_ or _simpuvium_. The latter were
chiefly associated with sacrifices, and will be dealt with later (p.
471); the _cyathus_ was regularly used at the table for measuring out
the wine into the drinking-cups. We learn from Martial that in drinking
a toast it was customary to use the number of cyathi that corresponded
to the letters in the name of the recipient, as in the epigram

           Laevia sex cyathis, septem Justina bibatur,
             Quinque Lycas, Lyde quattuor, Ida tribus.[3268]

Of drinking-cups the Romans had almost as large a variety as the
Greeks, the majority of the ornamented vases preserved to this day
being apparently for this purpose; the number of names recorded in
literature is, however, much less, as many of those given in the long
list on pp. 181-183 of Vol. I. are mere nick-names for ordinary forms.
The generic name for a drinking-cup was _poculum_,[3269] the Greek
p?t?????, just as _vas_ was the generic name for a larger vessel; it
occurs constantly in the poets, who, indeed, use it somewhat loosely,
and has already been met with in the series of small bowls with Latin
inscriptions described in Chapter XI. (p. 490). Many forms of
drinking-cups used by the Romans were only made in metal, such as the
_cantharus_,[3270] _carchesium_,[3271] and _scyphus_[3272] (see Vol. I.
pp. 184, 187). All these were forms borrowed from the Greeks, as were
the _calix_ (_kylix_), the _cotula_ (chiefly used as a measure =
half-a-pint), and the _scaphium_[3273] and _cymbium_,[3274] which were
boat-shaped vessels. The _ciborium_ (a rare word, but used by
Horace[3275]) was supposed to be made in the form of the leaves or pods
of the _colocasia_, or Egyptian bean.[3276] Its later ecclesiastical
use is well known. Other names of which we hear are the
_batioca_,[3277] the _gaulus_,[3278] the _scutella_ (see below),[3279]
and the _amystis_, or cup drained at one draught (see Vol. I. p.
181).[3280] Like the Greek _kylix_, the _calix_ appears to have been of
all these the one most commonly in use, and is constantly referred to
by poets and prose writers. Those of terracotta could often be
purchased at a very low price, and formed, it is evident, the ordinary
drinking-cups of the Roman citizen; they were also frequently of glass.
Juvenal speaks of “plebeian cups purchased for a few _asses_”[3281];
and Martial describes a man buying two _calices_ for an _as_ and taking
them home with him.[3282] We have no exact information as to its form,
but it must have been something like the Greek _kylix_, only probably
without handles; it was also used for solid food such as herbs.[3283]
Seneca speaks of _calices Tiburtinae_, which seem from the context to
have been of earthenware.[3284] Varieties of the _calix_ are probably
represented by the typical Gaulish forms illustrated in Chapter XXIII.,
Figs. 221-223.

Of dishes and other utensils employed for food at the table, the
largest were the _lanx_ and the _patina_. The former is described by
Horace and Juvenal as large enough to hold a whole boar,[3285] and was
probably of metal; the _patina_ is described as a dish for holding
fish, crabs, or lobsters,[3286] but that it was not necessarily limited
in size is shown by the stories already alluded to of Domitian and
Vitellius (p. 456). The latter, when dragged to his death, was insulted
by the epithet of _patinarius_, or dish-maker.[3287] The patina was
flat, and made of clay, and is also described as a wide and shallow
vessel for cooking.[3288] It is contrasted with the _lagena_ in the
well-known fable of the fox and the stork.[3289] Smaller dishes for
sweetmeats and other dainties were the _catinum_ and _catillum_, and
the _patella_.[3290] The _discus_ and _paropsis_[3291] appear to have
been, like the _lanx_, principally of metal; the former was like a
shield (whence _scutula_ and _scutella_); the latter is mentioned by
Isidorus, who describes it as quadrangular, and by Martial, together
with some obscurely-named dishes[3292]:

                   Sic implet gabatas paropsidesque
                   Et leves scutulas cavasque lances.

Martial speaks of the _patella_ as a dish for a turbot, and also as a
vessel of black ware which was used to hold vegetables[3293]; the
_catinus_ (a fictile dish) was large enough to hold a good-sized fish,
such as a tunny,[3294] and the _catillus_ appears to have been a sort
of porringer. Sauces were placed in small dishes or cups, known as
_acetabula_ (the Greek ???ßaf??), which were evidently of
earthenware[3295]; the _catellus_ held pepper,[3296] and the _concha_
or shell was used for a salt-cellar, also for unguents.[3297] The
latter was probably a real shell, not of earthenware. Another kind of
dish which is only once mentioned, in Horace’s account of Nasidienus’
banquet, was the _mazonomum_, probably a kind of _lanx_, in metal,
which held on that occasion a sort of _ragoût_ of game.[3298] His own
table, however, he boasts, was adorned only by a _cyathus_ and two
cups, an _echinus_ or rinsing-bowl, a _guttus_, and a _patera_ or
libation bowl.[3299] The _guttus_ seems to have corresponded to the
Greek _lekythos_ or _askos_, and is the general name for an oil-flask
or cruet.[3300] It was either a small, long-necked bottle or a squat
flask with a narrow spout, which allowed the oil to pour slowly.
Roach-Smith published a relief dedicated by Egnatius, a physician, to
the Deae Matres, on which small vases of the first-named form appear,
indicating that he consecrated his medicine bottles to these
divinities.[3301]

Of vessels for cooking, washing, and other common domestic purposes,
the _olla_ was that in most general use[3302]; the word is, in fact, a
generic name for a jar or pot (Gk. ??t?a), as in the play of Plautus,
the _Aulularia_, the name of which embodies an archaic form of the
word, _aula_, _aulula_. Here it was used for hiding a hoard of gold. It
was also, as has been noted, used as a funerary urn, and some inscribed
examples of marble _ollae_ have been found in tombs. The _pelvis_ was
more particularly a washing basin, but Juvenal speaks of it as scented
with Falernian wine.[3303] It is usually identified with the
_mortarium_, a large, shallow, open bowl with a spout, frequently found
in Britain and Central Europe (see below, p. 550); it is of coarse
light-red clay, and often has the potter’s name stamped upon it. That
it was used for pounding substances is shown by the fact that it often
has small pebbles embedded in the surface of the interior. The _scutra_
is mentioned by Cato and Plautus,[3304] and appears to have been used
only in Republican times; its Imperial successor was the
_cacabus_.[3305] The _trua_ or _trulla_[3306] was a saucepan with a
flat handle; numerous examples in bronze, silver, and earthenware have
been preserved, and some have elaborate designs in relief on the
handle.[3307]

A number of obscure and archaic names of vases are recorded by the
etymologists and other writers, especially in regard to those used for
sacrificial purposes and libations. The _capis_ or _capedo_ was
probably a kind of jug (from _capere_, to contain)[3308]; Cicero refers
to the _capedunculae_ which were a legacy from Numa.[3309] The
_praefericulum_[3310] was not, as usually supposed in popular
archaeology, a jug, but a shallow basin of bronze without handles, like
a _patera_. The _lepasta_ or _lepesta_ (cf. Greek ?ep?st?) is recorded
as used in Sabine temples,[3311] and the _futile_ was used in the cult
of Vesta for holding water[3473]; the _cuturnium_[3313] is also
mentioned. The _simpulum_[3314] and _simpuvium_[3315] represent similar
utensils, though the words are distinct; they were small-sized ladles
used almost exclusively in religious rites, and sometimes regarded as
old-fashioned. With reference to the size, _fluctus in simpulo
excitare_[3316] became a proverbial expression for “a storm in a
teacup.” They seem to have been usually of metal, but Pliny speaks of
fictile _simpula_[3317]; the _simpuvium_ is represented on coins and
sacrificial reliefs. The _lanx_ appears to have been used for offerings
to Bacchus,[3318] and the _guttus_, _cymbium_, and other forms also
appear in a sacrificial connection[3319]; conversely the _patera_,
which is for the most part exclusively a libation bowl, was sometimes
used for secular purposes[3320]; there is evidence that its use as a
drinking vessel is older than its use for libations. The last-named
corresponds to the Greek f???? (Vol. I. p. 191),[3321] and is
constantly referred to or represented; its essential feature was the
hollow knob or _omphalos_ in the centre, and it was either made of
metal or earthenware. The _patella_ was also used for libations or for
offering first-fruits to the household gods.[3322]

Other obscure words referring to vases of secular use are the
_pollubrum_ (Greek, p?da??pt??)[3323] and _malluvium_ (Greek,
??????),[3324] meaning respectively basins for washing the feet and
hands; the _aquiminarium_ for washing vessels[3325]; the _galeola_, a
variety of the _sinus_[3326]; the _pultarius_, a vessel used for warm
drinks, for must, for preserving grapes, for coals, for fumigating, and
as a cupping-glass[3327]; and the _obba_, which Persius describes as
_sessilis_, _i.e._ squat and flat-bottomed.[3328] The _culeus_,
_congius_, _hemina_, and _sextarius_ appear to have been measures only,
not vases in general use; the _congius_ was one-eighth of an amphora,
or six _sextarii_, about six English pints.[3329]

In the case of the majority of the names discussed in the foregoing
pages, any attempt at identification with existing forms is hopeless;
we have very few clues in the literature to the shapes of the vases
described, and little evidence from themselves, as is often the case
with Greek shapes; nor is any Roman writer except Isidorus, whose date
is too late to be trustworthy, so explicit as Athenaeus. At present
little has been done in the way of collecting the different forms of
existing vases, but a valuable treatise on the subject was recently
issued by the late O. Hölder, a Würtemberg professor, who collected all
the forms found in Germany and Italy,[3330] and although he did not
attempt to identify them by Latin names, he has done much service in
grouping them together, classified as urns, jars, jugs, and so on, in a
series of twenty-three plates of outline drawings.

There is, in fact, in Roman pottery no clear line of distinction to be
drawn between the various forms of drinking-cups or of jugs or dishes,
as is the case with Greek vases; different forms again are found in
different fabrics, and those typical of ornamented wares are not found
in plain pottery, and so on. Nor must it be forgotten that in Roman
pottery the ornamented wares are the exception rather than the rule.
Where the Greeks used painted vases, the Romans used metal; and apart
from the plain pottery, the forms are almost limited to a few varieties
of cups, bowls, and dishes. Comparisons with the Greek equivalents
illustrated in Chapter IV. may give a probable idea of what the Roman
meant when he spoke of an _urceus_ or an _olla_, but for the rest the
modern investigator can do little beyond attempting to point out what
types of vases were peculiar to different periods or fabrics, and in
most cases any attempt to give specific names can only be regarded as
arbitrary.

-----

Footnote 3080:

  _H.N._ xxxiii. 154 ff.: see below, p. 489.

Footnote 3081:

  _Vases ornés de la Gaule Romaine_, i. p. 190 ff.

Footnote 3082:

  The term is applied to clay suited to receive stamps (_sigilla_) or
  impressions.

Footnote 3083:

  Déchelette, _Vases ornés de la Gaule Romaine_, ii. p. 335.

Footnote 3084:

  _Ibid._ i. p. 41 ff.

Footnote 3085:

  _Der Stil_, ii. p. 148.

Footnote 3086:

  _Bonner Jahrbücher_, xcvi. p. 20.

Footnote 3087:

  In the case of fragment No. 3 the clay and lime could not be
  differentiated.

Footnote 3088:

  In the case of fragments 2 and 5 no definite general result was
  obtained.

Footnote 3089:

  Brongniart, _Traité_, i. p. 421; Blümner, _Technologie_, ii. p. 91.
  See also _Handbook to Collection of Pottery in the Museum of
  Practical Geology_, 1893, p. 65, for an analysis made on a fragment
  of glazed red ware by Dr. Percy:

                    Silica                    54·45
                    Alumina                   22·08
                    Peroxide of iron           7·31
                    Lime                       9·76
                    Magnesia                   1·67
                    Potash                     3·22
                    Soda                       1·76
                                                ———
                                             100·25
                                             ======

Footnote 3090:

  _Storia degli ant. vast aretini_, p. 65.

Footnote 3091:

  _Ueber die rothe Topferwaare_, p. 16.

Footnote 3092:

  Brongniart, _Traité_, i.  p. 423; Déchelette, ii. p. 339.

Footnote 3093:

  Blümner, _Technol._ ii. p. 91.

Footnote 3094:

  _Op. cit._ i. p. 381: cf. Blümner, ii. p. 64.

Footnote 3095:

  _Roman Art in Cirencester_, p. 77.

Footnote 3096:

  Plaut. _Epid._ iii. 2, 35; Pliny, _H.N._ vii. 198.

Footnote 3097:

  _Art. Poet._ 21.

Footnote 3098:

  _Sat._ ii. 7, 86.

Footnote 3099:

  ii. 3, 48.

Footnote 3100:

  _Capt._ ii. 3, 9; Persius, iii. 23; Avianus, _Fab._ 41, 9.

Footnote 3101:

  Shakespeare, 1 _Henry VI._, Act 1, scene 5, line 19.

Footnote 3102:

  Smith, _Dict. of Antiqs._[3312] i. p. 844: see below, p. 480; also
  Vol. I. p. 207.

Footnote 3103:

  _Vases ornés_, ii. p. 338.

Footnote 3104:

  See Brongniart, _Traité_, i. p. 423 ff.; Blümner, _Technol._ ii. p.
  106; Von Hefner, in _Oberbayr. Archiv für vaterl. Gesch._ xxii.
  (1863), pp. 23, 35; and _Röm. Mitth._ 1897, p. 286.

Footnote 3105:

  See Fabroni, _Storia degli vasi aretini_, pl. 5, fig. 4.

Footnote 3106:

  _Handbook to Mus._ (1891), p. 111.

Footnote 3107:

  Brongniart and Riocreux, _Mus. de Sèvres_, pp. 16, 128. For Cerialis
  see p. 536 and _C.I.L._ xiii. 10010, 544; for Cobnertus, _ibid._ 592,
  and Déchelette, i. p. 179.

Footnote 3108:

  _Oberbayr. Archiv für vaterl. Gesch._ xxii. (1863), pp. 23, 24.

Footnote 3109:

  Blümner, _Technologie_, ii. p. 104, fig. 21; _Brit. Arch. Assoc.
  Journ._ iv. p. 19. Déchelette states that about fifty in all are
  known (_op. cit._ i. p. 337).

Footnote 3110:

  Brongniart, _Traité_, i. p. 424, pl. 30; _Mus. de Sèvres_, p. 128,
  and pl. 9, fig. 8.

Footnote 3111:

  _Oberbayr. Archiv_, 1863, p. 24.

Footnote 3112:

  Examples of this technique often occur in Gaul and Britain: see
  Déchelette, ii. p. 169 ff., and cf. Roach-Smith, _Ill. Rom. Lond._ p.
  91, and a fine vase from Felixstowe in the British Museum. See also
  Plate LXIX. fig. 2, and p. 529.

Footnote 3113:

  See below, p. 530, and Déchelette, ii. p. 235 ff.

Footnote 3114:

  Blümner, _Technol._ ii. p. 112.

Footnote 3115:

  _E.g._ Blümner, _Technol._ ii. pp. 106, 107, figs. 22, 23.

Footnote 3116:

  _Gaz. Arch._ 1881-82, p. 17; Brongniart, _Traité_, pl. 30, figs. 2-4:
  see also Déchelette, i. p. 141 ff., and below, p. 525 ff.

Footnote 3117:

  Cf. Déchelette in _Revue des Études Anciens_, v. (1903), p. 42.

Footnote 3118:

  Blümner, ii. p. 110, fig. 25: cf. Von Hefner in _Oberbayr. Archiv_,
  1863, p. 56; Fabroni, _Storia degli antichi vasi aretini_, pls. 3, 5,
  p. 63.

Footnote 3119:

  Blümner, ii. p. 111; Daremberg and Saglio, ii. _art._ Figlinum, p.
  1130.

Footnote 3120:

  Cf. von Hefner in _Oberbayr. Archiv für vaterl. Gesch._ xxii. (1863),
  p. 55.

Footnote 3121:

  _Vases ornés_, ii. p. 312.

Footnote 3122:

  Mau-Kelsey, _Pompeii_, p. 386; _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1875. p. 192;
  _Mon. Antichi_, i. pl. 8, 7, p. 282.

Footnote 3123:

  _Oberbayr. Archiv für vaterl. Gesch._ xxii. (1863), p. 56 ff.: see
  also Blümner, ii. p. 23 ff., and Daremberg and Saglio, ii. _art._
  Figlinum.

Footnote 3124:

  _Bullet. Arch._ 1898, p. 18 ff., and _Mélanges Gallo-romaines_, ii.
  (1902), p. 93 ff.

Footnote 3125:

  Brongniart, i. p. 439.

Footnote 3126:

  _Rev. Arch._ xviii. (1868), pl. 23, p. 297.

Footnote 3127:

  See for a full account of the last-named Von Hefner in _op. cit._ p.
  8 ff., p. 56, pl. 4.

Footnote 3128:

  See _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1882, pl. U, to which the letters in the cut
  refer. Other kilns found at Heddernheim are described in
  _Westdeutsche Zeitschrift_, xviii. (1899), p. 215 ff.

Footnote 3129:

  See Haverfield in _Victoria County Hist. of Northants_, i. pp. 167,
  207 ff.

Footnote 3130:

  _Journ. Brit. Arch. Assoc._ i. p. 1 ff., ii. p. 164: see also Wright,
  _Celt, Roman, and Saxon_^1, p. 264 ff.; Roach-Smith, _Coll. Antiq._
  iv. p. 81, vi. p. 181 ff.

Footnote 3131:

  No. 958, fol. 105; reproduced by Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ vi.
  pl. 37, fig. 4, and _Ill. Rom. Lond._ p. 79; _Proc. Soc. Antiqs._ 2nd
  Ser. xvi. p. 42.

Footnote 3132:

  _Proc. Soc. Antiqs._ xvii. 1898, p. 262.

Footnote 3133:

  _Ibid._ xvi. (1895), p. 40.

Footnote 3134:

  _Vict. County Hist. of Norfolk_, i. p. 291, fig. 7: see below, p. 449.

Footnote 3135:

  _Op. cit._ i. p. 314.

Footnote 3136:

  _Ibid._ p. 322.

Footnote 3137:

  _Archaeologia_, xxxv. p. 91; _Vict. County Hist. of Hants_, i. p. 326.

Footnote 3138:

  Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ vi. p. 191 ff.; _Vict. County Hist. of
  Hants_, i. p. 306.

Footnote 3139:

  Roach-Smith, _op. cit._ ii. p. 38; vii. p. 1 ff., pls. 1-3.

Footnote 3140:

  Wright, _Celt, Roman, and Saxon_^1, p. 264 ff., and Haverfield in
  _Vict. County Hist. of Northants_, give the most satisfactory
  epitomes of Artis’ descriptions.

Footnote 3141:

  Cato, _Agricult._ 38.

Footnote 3142:

  Cf. Von Hefner, _op. cit._ pl. 4, 28-31: see also _Arch. Journ._ vii.
  p. 176, and an example from Switzerland in the British Museum
  (Romano-British Collection).

Footnote 3143:

  See also Déchelette, ii. p. 341.

Footnote 3144:

  See Haverfield in _Vict. County Hist. of Northants_, i. p. 207.

Footnote 3145:

  _Traité_, i. p. 426.

Footnote 3146:

  _Vict. County Hist. of Northants_, i. p. 209.

Footnote 3147:

  See Haverfield, _op. cit._ p. 210, fig. 31.

Footnote 3148:

  Haverfield, _ibid._; _Handbook of Pottery in Mus. of Pract. Geol._
  1893, p. 71.

Footnote 3149:

  _Archaeologia_, xxii. pl. 36, p. 413; _Vict. County Hist._ i. p. 291.

Footnote 3150:

  See Brongniart, _Traité_, i. p. 428, pl. 1; Artis, _Durobrivae_, pl.
  27, figs. 3 and 6; Daremberg and Saglio _s.v._ Fornax, figs. 3201-02.

Footnote 3151:

  Brongniart, i. p. 429.

Footnote 3152:

  Von Hefner in _Oberbayr. Archiv_ (1863), p. 58.

Footnote 3153:

  Cf. Tibull. i. 1, 38:

               “Nec e puris spernere fictilibus.
               Fictilia antiquus primum sibi fecit agrestis
               Pocula de facili composuitque luto.”

Footnote 3154:

  _Sat._ ii. 60.

Footnote 3155:

  _Sat._ vi. 342.

Footnote 3156:

  _Sat._ iii. 168.

Footnote 3157:

  Florus, i. 18, 22.

Footnote 3158:

  Pliny, _H.N._ xxxiii. 142.

Footnote 3159:

  _Ep._ 95, 72.

Footnote 3160:

  _Apud_ Athen. vi. 229 D. He uses the curious expression, ???aµ??
  ????????, which, as in the use of the word ???aµ?? for marble tiles
  (Vol. I. p. 100), implies the antiquity of the use of fictile ware.
  See the next note.

Footnote 3161:

  vi. 229 C, where the use of ???aµ?? or dinner-service is discussed.

Footnote 3162:

  iv. 72, 131: cf. Mart. xiii. 81.

Footnote 3163:

  Suet. _Vit. Vitell._ 13 (_clypeum Minervae_, a???da p????????).

Footnote 3164:

  Pliny, _H.N._ xxxv. 164.

Footnote 3165:

  _Ibid._ 163.

Footnote 3166:

  iv. 88.

Footnote 3167:

  _Capt._ ii. 2, 41.

Footnote 3168:

  Virg. _Georg._ ii. 351.

Footnote 3169:

  Orelli, _Inser._ 4544; Gruter 607, 1; and see _C.I.L._ i. p 209.

Footnote 3170:

  See above, p. 351; and cf. _Archaeologia_, xxv. p. 1 ff.

Footnote 3171:

  _C.I.L._ vii. 1335, 1. The vase is now at Clare College, Cambridge.

Footnote 3172:

  _H.N._ xxxv. 160 (_fictilibus soliis_).

Footnote 3173:

  _Arch. Journ._ x. (1853), p. 230.

Footnote 3174:

  _Archaeologia_, xiv. pl. 6, p. 37 (in B.M.).

Footnote 3175:

  _Arch. Journ._, _loc. cit._

Footnote 3176:

  _Ill. Rom. Lond._ p. 88, and see p. 550.

Footnote 3177:

  v. 5, 8.

Footnote 3178:

  _Quaest. Nat._ vi. 19: cf. Arist. _Probl._ xi. 8, and Pliny, _H.N._
  xi. 270, _doliis inanibus_.

Footnote 3179:

  Krause, _Angeiologie_, pp. 126, 463.

Footnote 3180:

  See Middleton, _Remains of Ancient Rome_, ii. p. 56.

Footnote 3181:

  Middleton, _loc. cit._

Footnote 3182:

  Nissen, _Pompeian. Studien_, p. 64.

Footnote 3183:

  Nissen, _ibid._

Footnote 3184:

  See _Yorks. Arch. Journ._ iii. p. 1 ff., xv. p. 303; _Trans. Roy.
  Inst. of Brit. Architects_, 1881-2, p. 65 ff.; _Journ. Brit. Arch.
  Assoc._ xxxv. p. 95, xxxviii. p. 218.

Footnote 3185:

  xii. 18.

Footnote 3186:

  Brongniart, _Traité_, i. p. 407 ff.

Footnote 3187:

  ix. 58.

Footnote 3188:

  _Bull. Arch. Nap._ N.S. vii. 1859, p. 84; _C.I.L._ x. 8047, 10, 18.

Footnote 3189:

  Capitolinus, _Vit. Anton. Pii_, 3.

Footnote 3190:

  Varro _ap._ Non. p. 26; Paul, _ex_ Fest. p. 46 (Müller).

Footnote 3191:

  Columella, xii. 28, 1; Plaut. _Capt._ iv. 4, 9 (“preserve-jar”).

Footnote 3192:

  Isid. _Etym._ xx. 6.

Footnote 3193:

  _Agricult._ 39.

Footnote 3194:

  _H.N._ xviii. 236.

Footnote 3195:

  _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1846, p. 34.

Footnote 3196:

  Marini, _Inscr. Ant. Doliari_, p. 406, No. 2.

Footnote 3197:

  Marini, No. 4.

Footnote 3198:

  See Fig. 22, Vol. I. p. 154.

Footnote 3199:

  _Formen der röm. Thongef._ p. 16, pls. 1-8.

Footnote 3200:

  Cf. Koenen, _Gefässkunde_, pls. 10-12.

Footnote 3201:

  _Od._ i. 9, 7.

Footnote 3202:

  Pliny, _H.N._ xiv. 135.

Footnote 3203:

  Cf. Jahn,  _Wandgem.  d. Villa Pamph._ pl. 5, p. 42.

Footnote 3204:

  See Hultsch, _Metrologie_, p. 113.

Footnote 3205:

  _Recueil_, p. 46.

Footnote 3206:

  Roach-Smith, _Ill. Rom. Lond._ p. 87; _Collect. Antiq._ ii. p. 26.

Footnote 3207:

  General reference may be made to the various volumes of the Latin
  _Corpus_, under the headings _Instrumentum Domesticum_, sub-heading
  _Vascula_, e.g. vii. 1331 for those found in Britain; for examples
  from Spain see _Arch. Journ._ lvi. p. 299.

Footnote 3208:

  _C.I.L._ vii. 1331, 22, xiii. 10005, 25; Steiner, _Cod. Inscr. Rom.
  Danubii et Rheni_, ii. pp. 271, 287; and see generally _C.I.L._ xiii.
  part 3, No. 10002.

Footnote 3209:

  _C.I.L._ vii. 1331, 6, 13.

Footnote 3210:

  _C.I.L._ x. 8056, 260.

Footnote 3211:

  _Ibid._ iv. 2555.

Footnote 3212:

  _Ibid._ vii. 1332, 1.

Footnote 3213:

  _Ibid._ viii. 10477, 1.

Footnote 3214:

  _Ibid._ iv. 2552.

Footnote 3215:

  See Vol. I. p. 158.

Footnote 3216:

  _C.I.L._ x. 8055, 11; iv. 2584, 2616: cf. Vol. I. p. 158.

Footnote 3217:

  _C.I.L._ iv. 2603: cf. Pliny, _H.N._ xiv. 75.

Footnote 3218:

  _C.I.L._ iv. 2555.

Footnote 3219:

  _Ibid._ 2625.

Footnote 3220:

  _Ibid._ 2589-94, 2575 ff. On inscribed amphorae from Pompeii see also
  Mau-Kelsey, _Pompeii_, p. 505.

Footnote 3221:

  Doni, p. lxxxvi. Found on the Aventine, now in the Museo Kircheriano.

Footnote 3222:

  _Ber. d. sächs. Gesellsch._ 1857, p. 199.

Footnote 3223:

  _C.I.L._ xv. pt. 2, No. 4719.

Footnote 3224:

  _Ibid._ iv. 2584.

Footnote 3225:

  _Poen._ iv. 2, 14: _literatas fictiles epistolas_; the double play on
  the words cannot be expressed in English.

Footnote 3226:

  _Rud._ ii. 5, 21.

Footnote 3227:

  v. 33.

Footnote 3228:

  Cf. also Plaut. _Amph._ i. 1, 273; Virg. _Aen._ i. 195 (for the wine
  of Acestes).

Footnote 3229:

  _Od._ iv. 11, 2; 12, 17.

Footnote 3230:

  i. 19, 2: cf. Juv. vi. 344, and p. 477.

Footnote 3231:

  i. 56; iv. 66.

Footnote 3232:

  x. 36.

Footnote 3233:

  Mart. i. 44, 8; Pliny, _H.N._ xviii. 307.

Footnote 3234:

  _H.N._ xv. 82.

Footnote 3235:

  Mart. vi. 27, 6.

Footnote 3236:

  _H.N._ xiv. 96; Isid. _Etym._ xvi. 26, 13.

Footnote 3237:

  Hor. _Sat._ ii. 4, 66; Varro, _R.R._ i. 13, 6; Isid. _Etym._ xx. 6.

Footnote 3238:

  As often by Virgil and Ovid, usually in the form _cratera_: cf. Isid.
  _Etym._ xx. 5.

Footnote 3239:

  _Fasti_, v. 522.

Footnote 3240:

  Hor. _Sat._ ii. 8, 39; Cic. _in Verr._ iv. 27, 62.

Footnote 3241:

  Cic. _de Fin._ iii. 4, 15; Varro, _R.R._ i. 8, 5.

Footnote 3242:

  Hor. _Sat._ i. 6, 109: see also Juv. _Sat._ vi. 426; Persius, v. 140;
  Isid. _Etym._ xx. 6.

Footnote 3243:

  Cic. _in Vatin._ 14, 34; Lucan, v. 394: cf. Marquardt,
  _Privataltert._ vii. p. 629, note 3.

Footnote 3244:

  _In Verr._ ii. 51, 127: cf. Plutarch, _Vit. T. Gracch._ 11; also
  Isid. _Etym._ xx. 6: _Vasis genus aquatilis_.

Footnote 3245:

  See Orelli, 4546, and for _urna_, Suet. _Calig._ 15; Lucan, vii. 819;
  Ovid, _passim_.

Footnote 3246:

  Plaut. _Cas._ ii. 6, 11; Livy, xxv. 3. 16.

Footnote 3247:

  _Etym._ xx. 6.

Footnote 3248:

  Cf. Caes. _Bell. Civ._ ii. 11; Lucan, iv. 420.

Footnote 3249:

  Paul, _ex_ Fest. _ed._ Müller, p. 63, 12.

Footnote 3250:

  Plaut. _Curc._ i. 1, 75; _Rud._ v. 2, 32; and see Virg. _Ecl._ vii.
  33; Varro, _L.L._ v. 123.

Footnote 3251:

  Plaut. _Stich._ ii. 2, 28; Cato, _Agricult._ 11; Varro, _Re Rust._ i.
  22: cf. Juv. v. 47 for _nasus_, applied to a cup.

Footnote 3252:

  _Ad Fam._ vii. 29: cf. also Plaut. _Aulul._ iv. 2, 15; Pers. iii. 22.

Footnote 3253:

  Plaut. _Amph._ i. 1, 273; Cato, _Agricult._ 81; Varro, _ap._ Non.
  546, 23.

Footnote 3254:

  Martial, xiv. 106; Juv. iii. 203 (_urceoli sex_); Varro, _R.R._ i.
  22; Treb. Poll. _Vit. Claud._ 17; Plaut. _Merc._ v. 2, 86; _id._
  _Pers._ i. 3, 43; Cic. _Fin._ iv. 12, 30.

Footnote 3255:

  Hor. _A.P._ 97: cf. the ???????? episode in the _Frogs_ (Vol. I. p.
  196); also the word _ampullari_.

Footnote 3256:

  Plin. _Ep._ iv. 30, 6; Mart. xiv. 110.

Footnote 3257:

  _Florida_, ii. 9, 2: cf. the terracotta vessels with reliefs in the
  British Museum, D 204-5; also _Mus. Greg._ i. pl. 10; Micali, _Mon.
  Ined._ pl. 52. Isidorus derives the word from _ampla bulla_, in
  reference to its rotund form (_Etym._ xx. 5).

Footnote 3258:

  _Rev. Arch._ xviii. (1868), pl. 22, p. 225.

Footnote 3259:

  Mart. vii. 61, 5.

Footnote 3260:

  Hor. _Ep._ ii. 2, 134.

Footnote 3261:

  Cf. the episode in Petronius, _Sat._ 22.

Footnote 3262:

  Pliny, _H.N._ xvi. 128.

Footnote 3263:

  Pliny, _Ep._ i. 6: cf. Juv. xii. 60.

Footnote 3264:

  Juv. viii. 161.

Footnote 3265:

  Hor. _Sat._ ii. 8, 41.

Footnote 3266:

  _C.I.L._ xiii. 10008, 4.

Footnote 3267:

  Hor. _Od._ iii. 8, 13; 19, 12.

Footnote 3268:

  i. 71: cf. viii. 51, 21; ix. 95; xi. 37; Hor. _Od._ iii. 19, 11 ff.

Footnote 3269:

  See Varro, _L.L._ v. 122; Isid. _Etym._ xx. 5, where the derivation
  from _potare_ is given.

Footnote 3270:

  Virg. _Ecl._ vi. 17; Plaut. _Asin._ v. 2, 56; Hor. _Od._ i. 20, 2;
  and see Daremberg and Saglio, _s.v._

Footnote 3271:

  See Macrob. v. 21.

Footnote 3272:

  Hor. _Od._ i. 27, 1; _Epod._ ix. 33; Isid. _Etym._ xx. 6, describes
  it as a wash-hand basin.

Footnote 3273:

  Plaut. _Stich._ v. 4, 11; Cic. _in Verr._ iv. 17, 37 and 24, 54.

Footnote 3274:

  Mart. viii. 6, 2; Isid. _Etym._ xx. 5.

Footnote 3275:

  _Od._ ii. 7, 22.

Footnote 3276:

  Porphyrion _ad_ Hor. _loc. cit._

Footnote 3277:

  Plaut. _Stich._ v. 4, 12.

Footnote 3278:

  _Id. Rud._ v. 2, 32.

Footnote 3279:

  Cic. _Tusc._ iii. 19, 46.

Footnote 3280:

  Isid. _Etym._ xx. 5.

Footnote 3281:

  xi. 145.

Footnote 3282:

  ix. 60, 22.

Footnote 3283:

  Varro, _L.L._ v. 127; Ovid, _Fast._ v. 509.

Footnote 3284:

  _Ep._ 119, 3.

Footnote 3285:

  Hor. _Sat._ ii. 4, 41; Juv. v. 80.

Footnote 3286:

  Hor. _Sat._ i. 3, 80; ii. 2, 95; ii. 8, 43, 55.

Footnote 3287:

  Suet. _Vitell._ 17: cf. 13.

Footnote 3288:

  Isid. _Etym._ xx. 4: _dispansis patentibusque oris_.

Footnote 3289:

  Phaedr. i. 26.

Footnote 3290:

  Hor. _Sat._ i. 3, 90; ii. 4, 75; i. 6, 115; _Ep._ i. 5, 2.

Footnote 3291:

  Juv. iii. 142; Mart. xi. 28; Alciphr. _Ep._ iii. 20; Isid. _Etym._
  xx. 4.

Footnote 3292:

  xi. 32, 18: cf. vii. 47, 3. Isidorus, _Etym._ xx. 4, says _gabata_ =
  _cavata_.

Footnote 3293:

  xiii. 81; v. 79, 7: see Isid. _Etym._ xx. 8.

Footnote 3294:

  Hor. _Sat._ ii. 4, 77; Pers. v. 182; Isid. _Etym._ xx. 6. For other
  uses see Juv. xi. 108; Pliny, _H.N._ xxxiii. 69. Isidorus says
  _catinum_ is a better form.

Footnote 3295:

  Isid. _Etym._ xx. 4.

Footnote 3296:

  Hor. _Sat._ ii. 4, 75.

Footnote 3297:

  Hor. _Od._ ii. 7, 23; _Sat._ i. 3, 14.

Footnote 3298:

  Hor. _Sat._ ii. 8, 86.

Footnote 3299:

  _Sat._ i. 6, 118.

Footnote 3300:

  Juv. iii. 263; xi. 158: cf. Vol. I. pp. 200, 211, 503.

Footnote 3301:

  _Collect. Antiq._ v. p. 8.

Footnote 3302:

  Catull. 94, 2; Juv. xiv. 171. For examples of _ollae_, see Overbeck,
  _Pompeii_, p. 414, Daremberg and Saglio, _s.v._, and Pl. LXIX. fig.
  2; see also pp. 389, 456, 550. Isidorus expressly states that it was
  used for boiling water (_Etym._ xx. 8).

Footnote 3303:

  vi. 430. Isidorus (_Etym._ xx. 6) derives it from _pedes_.

Footnote 3304:

  Cato, R.R. 157; Plant. _Pers._ i. 3, 8.

Footnote 3305:

  Isid. _Etym._ xx. 8.

Footnote 3306:

  Varro _ap._ Non. p. 19, 14.

Footnote 3307:

  Cf. _B.M. Cat. of Bronzes_, Nos. 2461-2465; also Déchelette, _Vases
  de la Gaule Romaine_, ii. p. 316.

Footnote 3308:

  Varro _ap._ Non. 547, 12; Pliny, _H.N._ xxxvii. 18; Livy, x. 7, 10;
  Cic. _Rep._ vi. 2, 11; _id._ _Parad._ i. 2, 11.

Footnote 3309:

  _De Nat. Deor._ iii. 17, 43.

Footnote 3310:

  The word is only given by Festus (p. 248, Müller).

Footnote 3311:

  Varro _ap._ Non. 547, 19.

Footnote 3312:

  Paul, _ex_ Fest. p. 89, 4, with Müller’s note.

Footnote 3313:

  Paul, _ex_ Fest. p. 51, 1.

Footnote 3314:

  Varro, _L.L._ v. 124; Paul, _ex_ Fest. p. 337, 10 (non dissimile
  cyatho).

Footnote 3315:

  Varro _ap._ Non. 544, 23; Cic. _Rep._ vi. 2, 11; Juv. vi. 343.

Footnote 3316:

  Cic. _Legg._ iii. 16, 36.

Footnote 3317:

  _H.N._ xxxv. 158. An example of a bronze _simpulum_ may be seen in
  the Bronze Room of the British Museum (Case E).

Footnote 3318:

  Virg. _Georg._ ii. 394.

Footnote 3319:

  _Id._ _Aen._ iii. 66; Varro, _L.L._ v. 124.

Footnote 3320:

  Varro, _L.L._ v. 122; Virg. _Aen._ i. 729.

Footnote 3321:

  See Isid. _Etym._ xx. 5, who suggests a derivation from _patere_,
  “quod patentes sunt dispansisque labris.”

Footnote 3322:

  Ov. _Fast._ ii. 634; Juv. v. 85: cf. Plaut. _Cist._ ii. 1, 46.

Footnote 3323:

  Paul, _ex_ Fest. p. 247, Müll.; Varro, 544, 19 (_ap._ Non.).

Footnote 3324:

  Paul, _ex_ Fest. p. 160.

Footnote 3325:

  Digest, xxxiv. 2, 19, § 12.

Footnote 3326:

  Varro _ap._ Non. 547, 14.

Footnote 3327:

  _H.N._ vii. 185; Petron. 42; Colum. xii. 43, 7; Pallad. _Agric._ vii.
  7; Cels. 2, 11.

Footnote 3328:

  V. 148: see also Tert. _Apol._ 13; Varro _ap._ Non. 146, 8; 545, 2.

Footnote 3329:

  Cato, _R.R._ 57; Livy, xxv. 2, 8; Pliny, _H.N._ xiv. 85, 144. For a
  bronze _congius_ representing the standard measure see Hultsch,
  _Metrologie_, p. 123; also Daremberg and Saglio, _s.v._ On Roman
  metrology generally see Krause, _Angeiol._ p. 454, and Hultsch, _op.
  cit._ p. 112 ff.

Footnote 3330:

  _Die Formen der röm. Thongefässe, diesseits und jenseits der Alpen_
  (Stuttgart, 1897). For the forms peculiar to the ornamented wares,
  reference should be made to Dragendorff’s article in _Bonner Jahrb._
  xcvi. pls. 1-3, and Déchelette, _Vases de la Gaule Romaine_, _passim._




                             CHAPTER XXII
          _ROMAN POTTERY, HISTORICALLY TREATED; ARRETINE WARE_

    Roman pottery mentioned by ancient writers—“Samian” ware—Centres of
      fabric—The pottery of Arretium—Characteristics—Potters’
      stamps—Shapes of Arretine vases—Sources of inspiration for
      decoration—“Italian Megarian bowls”—Subjects—Distribution of
      Arretine wares.


In the present chapter we propose to discuss the origin and character
of the finer Roman pottery, or red glazed ware with designs in relief,
which is usually known to modern writers under the convenient
designation of _terra sigillata_, a phrase which has already been
explained (p. 434). Not only in clay and glaze but in decoration these
wares are characteristically Roman; but the question as to the actual
centre or centres of their manufacture still admits of some discussion.

Relying principally upon the testimony of Pliny, Martial, and other
ancient writers, archaeologists have been accustomed to classify the
red ware with reliefs, on a rough system of distinction according to
artistic merit, as Arretine, Samian, and “false Samian.” The latter
term “Samian” has indeed acquired such popularity that it has passed
into the language as a conventional term of almost every-day use; but
to the scientific investigator it has long been apparent that in point
of accuracy it almost stands on a level with that of “Etruscan vase.”
That of “false Samian” has usually been applied to a certain class of
provincial wares, technically inferior to the “Samian.” But though both
terms may still retain currency in popular language for the sake of
convenience, it must not be supposed that they are impressed with the
hall-mark of scientific terminology.

Before however we attempt to distinguish the different fabrics on the
basis of recent researches, it may be as well to investigate the
statements of the classical writers and weigh the evidence which they
afford on the various kinds of pottery in use in Italy under the Roman
Empire.

The most valuable information is found in the pages of Pliny,
supplemented by Isidorus of Seville, who, writing in the seventh
century, probably gives merely second-hand information. The
former[3331] says: “The majority of mankind use earthenware vessels.
Samian ware is commended even at the present day for dinner services;
this reputation is also kept up by Arretium in Italy, and for
drinking-cups by Surrentum, Hasta, Pollentia, Saguntum in Spain, and
Pergamum in Asia. Tralles is also a centre for pottery, and Mutina in
Italy ... and exportation from the celebrated potteries goes on all
over the world.” Isidorus, who largely quotes from Pliny, gives the
tradition that Samos was the seat of the original invention of pottery,
“whence too came Samian vases.”[3332] He goes on to say that “Arretine
vases are so called from Arretium, a town in Italy where they are made,
for they are red.” But in regard to “Samian ware” he admits that there
is another explanation of the term, namely that it is a corruption of
Samnia. Herein he is possibly not far from the truth, for we have
already seen that the adjacent region of Campania was in the last few
centuries of the Republic famous as a centre for relief-wares, and it
is possible that the manufacture of such pottery was carried on in the
district, as for instance at Puteoli, long afterwards. We also know
that Allifae in Samnium was a seat of this industry,[3333] and that a
special class of pottery was made at Ocriculum and at Mevania in Umbria
about 200 B.C. (see below, p. 490).

On the other hand there is no doubt that Samos had a reputation for its
pottery for many centuries, as is implied by the tradition which
Isidorus quotes and by the words of Pliny: “even at the present day it
is commended.” In a previous chapter it has been suggested that the
so-called Megarian bowls, which undoubtedly are a prototype of the
Roman wares, represent the Samian pottery of the Hellenistic period;
but whether this is so or not, the most probable conclusion is that the
term “Samian” connotes in the first instance a Greek, not a Roman,
fabric; that this Greek ware was imported into Italy; and that it
became so popular that the term really came into use for native
products, just as now-a-days we are able to speak of “China” which has
travelled no further than from Worcester, Sèvres, or Dresden. It may
thus have become a generic name for table-ware. Plautus mentions Samian
ware more than once (see above, p. 456), usually with reference to its
brittleness, as in the _Menaechmi_,[3334] where Menaechmus says, “Knock
gently!” to which the parasite Peniculus replies: “I suppose you are
afraid the doors are Samian.” Again in the _Bacchides_,[3335] with a
jesting allusion to Samos as the home of one of the two heroines: “Take
care, please, that no one handles her carelessly; you know how easily a
Samian vase gets broken.” In another passage he speaks of a _Samiolum
poterium_.[3336] And Tertullian, speaking of Numa’s times, says that
only Samian vases were as yet in use.[3337]

Pliny also mentions Pergamum and Tralles as centres of fabrics, and
speaks of the _firmitas_ or toughness of that of Kos, but of these we
know nothing further. It has been pointed out by Dragendorff that there
was some manufacture of _terra sigillata_ in Asia Minor under the
Empire,[3338] probably an imitation of the Italian ware, as the
examples known present the same characteristics as the provincial wares
of Central Europe, and the forms are also those of the Arretine vases.
The same writer has shown that there were also manufactures of _terra
sigillata_ in Greece itself, in Egypt, and in Southern Russia, which
were of similar character.

To return to Italy and its local fabrics. It is not to be supposed that
there was any one principal centre, for different towns excelled in
their respective wares, and these were imported from one to the other,
and especially into Rome. This city was of course originally supplied
with earthenware by the Etruscans, whose mantle fell on the town of
Arretium, but it cannot be doubted that the manufacture of pottery must
have been carried on to some extent in Rome itself after the absorption
of the Etruscan people. We read that even in Numa’s time there was a
Guild of Potters (see p. 372), but it never appears to have excelled in
any of the finer wares, and is ignored by Pliny, though we have
evidence from other sources. Thus Martial speaks of _cadi
Vaticani_,[3339] and Juvenal of fragile dishes from the Vatican
hill.[3340] Cato says _dolia_ are best bought in Rome, tiles at
Venafrum.[3341] And the evidence of a pottery in the third and second
centuries B.C. on the Esquiline which is given by the find of lamps
described in Chapter XX. is supported by Festus.[3342]

Pliny, as we have seen, mentions Arretium, Hasta and Pollentia, Mutina
and Surrentum with commendation; he also couples the pottery of Hadria
with that of Kos for _firmitas_.[3343] He further implies that Arretium
kept up the old pre-eminence of the Samian ware, and this is borne out,
not only by what we gather from Martial and other writers, but still
more by modern discoveries, of which we shall shortly speak in detail.
Of the other potteries less is known, but remains have been found at
Hasta and Pollentia (Asti and Pollenza in Piedmont)[3344] and the
_figlinae_ of Velleia in the same region were also well known in
antiquity.[3345] At Mutina (Modena) remains of a pottery were found
(see Vol. I. p. 71), together with vases of Arretine type, and the
potter Fortis, whose name so often occurs on lamps (p. 426), appears to
have had his workshop here.[3346] His stamps are also found on tiles
and on pottery of all kinds, even Arretine. Here, too, were found vases
of black ware, of “Graeco-Campanian” style, sometimes with stamps
impressed from gems, and unglazed red plates stamped with small
palmettes like the Greek black-glazed wares (Vol. I. p. 212). Livy
mentions that in 176 B.C. a great destruction took place here of “all
kinds of vases, made more for use than for ornament.”[3347] In their
general results the pottery-finds are instructive as showing the
transition from black to red wares, which may also be observed in the
vases of Popilius and the early Arretine fabrics (see below).[3348]

Campania in general seems to have maintained the traditions of the
Calene and Etrusco-Campanian fabrics of the third century (Chapter
XI.), and there is evidence of manufacture and export in the first
century B.C. Horace’s table was supplied with _Campana supellex_.[3349]
Surrentum ware is mentioned by Martial[3350] as well as Pliny, and, as
indicated in the preceding chapter (p. 462), supplied amphorae of local
wine to Pompeii.[3351] The pottery of Cumae, which place was at an
earlier date an important centre for painted vases (Vol. I. p. 80), is
mentioned by Martial[3352] It would also seem to have supplied clay for
the vases made at the neighbouring Puteoli, which had no local clay
suitable for the purpose, and is not mentioned by ancient writers. The
latter has however yielded large numbers of vases of a type closely
resembling the Arretine, and a pottery was discovered in 1874, with
moulds.[3353] Some of the vases have Arretine stamps,[3354] which imply
importations during the first century B.C., but names of local potters
are also known, chief of whom is Numerius Naevius Hilarus, who employed
eleven slaves. Q. Pomponius Serenus and L. Valerius Titus are also
found here and elsewhere in Southern Italy and at Nismes.[3355] Some
fragments of this Puteoli ware from various sources are in the British
Museum.[3356]

Horace speaks of pottery from Allifae in Samnium,[3357] and Pliny
mentions the popularity of that made at Rhegium and Cumac[3358]; this
exhausts the list of sites known to us from ancient writers. In the
provinces the only place which had any fame was Saguntum, alluded to by
Pliny and more than once by Martial, who speaks of cups (_pocula_ and
_cymbia_) fashioned from Saguntine clay[3359]; also of a _synthesis
septenaria_ or nest of seven cups, “polished by the potter’s coarse
tool, of clay turned on the Spanish wheel.”[3360] But modern researches
on the site have not thrown any light on the character of the local
fabric (p. 540)[3361]; it is only at Tarragona that _terra sigillata_
has been found.

The pottery of Arretium is more than once referred to by Martial, who
notes that it compared unfavourably with the splendour of crystal
vessels, but at the same time begs his hearer not to regard it
altogether with contempt, for Porsena was well served with his Tuscan
earthenware[3362]:

                Arretina nimis ne spernas vasa monemus;
                  Lautus erat Tuscis Porsena fictilibus.

An epigram in the Latin Anthology (259) says:

            Arretine calix, mensis decor ante paternis,
              Ante manus medici quam bene sanus eras.[3363]

Other allusions are less direct.[3364] Coming down to more modern
times, we actually find mention of the pottery in a manuscript written
by Sig. Ristori of Arezzo in 1282, and by C. Villani in his _History of
the World_, written in the fourteenth century. Subsequently Alessi, who
lived in the time of Leo X., described the discovery of red ware about
a mile from the city, and Vasari tells us that in 1484 his grandfather
found in the neighbourhood three vaults of an ancient furnace. Further
allusions are found in the writings of Gori (1734) and Rossi (1796);
and in 1841 Fabroni published a history of Arretine ware,[3365] in
which the above facts are recorded. He tells us that in 1779 potteries
were unearthed at Cincelli or Centum Cellae, which contained, besides
various implements, part of a potter’s wheel, resembling those in vogue
at the present day. It was composed of two circular slabs placed round
one pivot at an interval from one another, their diameter not being the
same. The wheel actually found was of terracotta, about 11 inches in
diameter by 3 inches in thickness, with a groove round the edge. It was
bound with a leaden tyre, held in place by six cylinders of the same
metal, and appears to have been the upper of the two slabs, the “table”
on which the clay was placed.[3366]

The Arretine ware must be regarded as _the_ Roman pottery _par
excellence_. The term was used anciently in an extended sense for all
vases of a certain technique without regard to the place of
manufacture, as a piece of evidence from Spain tends to show. Pottery
has been found at Tarragona with the inscription, A TITII FIGVL ARRE,
_A. Titii figul(i) Arre(tini_),[3367] which has generally been taken to
mean a maker of Arretine ware living on the spot, just as now-a-days
Wilton or Brussels carpets may be made at Kidderminster.

The general characteristics of the Arretine ware are: (1) the fine
local red clay, carefully worked up and baked very hard to a rich
coral-colour, or like sealing-wax; (2) the fine red glaze, composed
chiefly of silica, iron oxide, and an alkaline substance, which, as we
have seen (p. 437), was perhaps borax; (3) the great variety of forms
employed, which show in a marked degree the influence of metal-work;
(4) the stamps with potter’s names, which are almost invariably found.
The duration of this pottery seems to have been from about 150 B.C. to
the end of the first century of the Empire, at which time pottery in
Italy had reached a very degenerate stage, and the height of its
success and popularity was during the first century B.C. Analyses of
the vases show that practically the same results as to their
composition are obtained from different periods.

During the last century these vases have been found in large numbers at
Arezzo, and there is now a considerable quantity of them collected in
the public museum of that city, as well as in private collections and
the museums of other countries. The official record of Italian
excavations contains an account of finds made in 1883, 1884, 1890,
1894, and 1896 on various sites in the city and immediate
neighbourhood,[3368] and gives the locality of the different
potteries,[3369] as well as the names of their owners. The first
potter’s name recorded was that of Calidius Strigo by Alessi; it was
found in 1492 in the presence of Giovanni de’ Medici, afterwards Leo X.
Others were given by Gori, and fuller lists (up to date) by Fabroni in
1841, Gamurrini in 1859, and Marini in 1884.[3370] At the present day
the most complete information on this head may be found in the recently
published volume of the _Corpus_ of Latin inscriptions dealing with
Etruria,[3371] in which the results of the most recent excavations are
incorporated. A large number have also been found at Rome, the names
being identical with those found at Arezzo, and the ware consequently
imported.[3372] It must be distinguished from the inferior relief wares
either of local fabric (see p. 492) or imported from Gaul, Northern
Italy, and elsewhere. Names of Arretine potters are also found in large
numbers at Modena, Rimini, and other places in Northern Italy, in
France, Spain, and elsewhere.

The stamps range in date from the second century B.C. down to the
Christian era, but not beyond the first century of the Empire. The
oldest of all, it is interesting to note, are found on black-glazed
wares similar in character to those from the Esquiline.[3373] The
red-glazed ware probably came in about 100 B.C., and the two methods
appear to have been for a time contemporaneous. The initials Q A · F
and C · V which occur on early red Arretine wares[3374] are also found
on the Esquiline lamps. Next comes the red ware with quadrangular
stamps repeated four or five times on the bottom, followed by single
quadrangular stamps and those of varying form, especially some in the
shape of a foot, which are not found in the best period at Arretium,
and seem to belong only to the time of the Empire. This form of stamp
is very common on lamps and plain pottery, and there are many examples
of bronze stamps in this shape extant.[3375] Those vases which have
stamps on the exterior in the midst of the design represent the middle
or Augustan period. The older stamps are more deeply impressed in the
surface of the vase than the later. On the whole, the palaeographical
evidence of the stamps is very slight, and we can only roughly date
them between 100 B.C. and 100 A.D.[3376] Dragendorff has, however,
noted that the slaves’ names are mostly Greek, a detail which helps to
establish a _terminus post quem_, placing them later than 146 B.C.

The Calidius Strigo of whom we have already spoken was a potter of some
importance, employing twenty slaves, of whom the names of Protus and
Synistor occur most frequently. But he only seems to have made plain
table wares without reliefs, examples of which are found in Rome and
elsewhere. A potter named Domitius had a workshop on the same spot, but
only employed a few slaves. A more important name is that of Publius
Cornelius, first found by Ferdinando Rossi in the eighteenth century at
Cincelli, together with remains of his workshop; many additional
examples were found in 1883 and 1892. He employed no less than forty
slaves, of whom the best known are Antioc(h)us, Faustus, Heraclides,
Primus, and Rodo. One vase by the last-named has medallions with the
head of Augustus and the inscription, AVGVSTVS, which gives the date of
the fabric.[3377] Previous to the discovery of this in 1893 Gamurrini
had supposed that Cornelius was one of the colonists placed at Arezzo
by Sulla. Many of his vases are found at Rome, and also in Spain and
Southern Italy. The vases with CORNELI in a foot-shaped stamp are
probably not his. He appears to have acquired the business of two other
potters—C. Tellius and C. Cispius.

Among all the potters’ stamps few are commoner than that of M.
Perennius, and his wares certainly take the highest rank for their
artistic merit. All his relief designs are copied from the best Greek
models, as will be seen later. Few of his vases seem to have been
exported to Rome, but they are found in Spain and Southern Gaul. The
form of the name on the stamps varies greatly,[3378] the commonest
being M. PERENNI; M. PEREN., M. PERE., and M. PER. are also found, and
even M. PE. with the letters joined in a monogram. He employed
seventeen slaves, of whom the best known is Tigranes. His name appears
as TIGRAN, TIGRA, or TIGR, and always in conjunction with that of
Perennius. These two are found on a vase with Achilles and Diomede
fighting against Hector,[3379] and on three Arretine moulds in the
British Museum, the subjects of which are a dance of Maenads, masks of
Maenads and Satyrs, and a banquet scene (Plate LXVI. figs. 4, 6). The
name of Tigranes appears alone on a fine vase in the Louvre with the
apotheosis of Herakles.[3380] Another slave, Cerdo, made a vase with
the nine Muses, their names being inscribed over them in Greek.[3381] A
third slave who produced vases of more than average merit was Bargates,
whose name is found on a fine vase in the Boston Museum (Fig.
218),[3382] the subject of which is the fall of Phaëthon, who lies
shattered in pieces on the ground, with Tethys coming to his rescue.
Zeus with his thunderbolt and Artemis with her bow have brought about
his downfall. Helios is seen collecting his terrified steeds; and the
rest of the design is occupied with the transformation of the Heliades
into poplars.

[Illustration:

  From _Philologus_.
  FIG. 218. ARRETINE BOWL WITH DEATH OF PHAËTHON (BOSTON MUSEUM).
]

The site of Perennius’ principal workshop appears to have been in the
city itself, close to the church of Sta. Maria in Gradi; but he may
also have had a branch manufactory at Cincelli or Centum Cellae. Signor
Pasqui[3383] notes that his name occurs alone on the interior of plain
bowls and dishes. Next to these come the copies of Greek models by
Cerdo, Pilades, Pilemo, and Nicephorus, followed by Tigranes, and then
by Bargates, who also worked for Tigranes when he became a freedman
(the stamps being in the form BARGATE / M · TIGR); lastly occur the
names of Crescens and Saturninus.

Three Annii had a pottery near the church of San Francesco, and
employed over twenty slaves, with both Greek and Roman names; the most
important of the three is C. Annius, who made vases with reliefs, as
did Lucius, but Sextus only made plain wares. There are also vases
stamped ANNI only; they probably belong to the first century B.C. Aulus
Titius is found frequently at Arezzo and Rimini, at Lillebonne in
France, and, as we have seen, in Spain; his wares also penetrated to
Africa and all parts of Italy. He has no names of slaves coupled with
his, and his signature appears in the various forms, _A. Titi_, _A.
Titi figul._, _A. Titi figul. Arret_. He was succeeded by C. Titius
Nepos, who had fifteen slaves, and there is also a L. Titius. C. and L.
Tettius occur at Rome, but only the latter at Arezzo[3384]; the word
SAMIA, which occurs on his stamps, is more likely to be a proper name
than to have any reference to Samian ware. The name of Rasinius, which
is associated with more names of slaves than any except P. Cornelius,
is found more often at Rome than at Arezzo[3385]; it also occurs at
Pompeii,[3386] and at Neuss in Germany, which facts point to the time
of Augustus and A.D. 79 as the limits of date. Of the numerous slaves,
some were afterwards employed by C. Memmius. There appear to have been
at least two representatives of the name, C. Rasinius in the Augustan
period, and L. Rasinius Pisanus in the Flavian. The latter Déchelette
has shown to be a degenerate Arretine, making imitations of Gaulish
ware.[3387] L. and C. Petronius are found at Arezzo, together with
remains of their potteries, and C. Gavius, who belongs to the
Republican period, at Cincelli. Numerous other potters who are probably
Arretine may be found in Ihm’s lists[3388]; on the other hand, there
are stamps found at Rome and in Etruria which cannot have originated
from Arretium. Such are _Atenio circitor refi(ciendum) curavit_,[3389]
and _Faustus Salinator Seriae_[3390]; those with OF(_ficina_), such as
OF · FELICIS, which are found at Rome, but are probably Gaulish[3391];
those with _fecit_ or _epoei_ (?p??e?),[3392] with the exception of
_Venicius fecit hec_, from Arezzo[3393]; and _Atrane_, a name found at
Vulci, Chiusi, and many other sites in Etruria, but not at Arezzo.[3394]

The name usually given in the signatures on the stamps is that of the
maker only; sometimes a slave’s name is added, either above or below
the maker’s, or on a separate stamp. The maker’s name usually gives the
_nomen_ and _praenomen_, implying a freedman, and when given in full is
seen to be in the genitive; the slave’s name is usually in the
nominative. Four typical varieties are given by the following stamps
from the pottery of P. Cornelius, with the name of the slave Potus:

             POTVS         P·CORN       POTI        P·CORN
             P·COR         POTVS        P·CORN        POTI

A difficulty sometimes arises in regard to these two-line stamps when
the slave’s name occurs _below_ that of the master, on account of the
frequent abbreviations; for instance, it is not easy to say whether
such stamps as

      A·VIBI  or   P·CORNELI
      DIOM         ANTHVS

denote one name or two, for there are certain instances where the
master has three names.[3395] It is always possible that the name
denotes a slave become a freedman, as A. Vibius Diomedes or P.
Cornelius Anthus, and in Dr. Dressel’s opinion[3396] this is the most
probable explanation; but the alternative has much in its favour. There
are, moreover, stamps such as

     P·MESEINI       or   P·CORNELI
     AMPLIO S(_ervus_)      FIRMVS F(_ecit_)

which, of course, leave no room for doubt. In later examples the
_praenomen_ is often omitted, and occasionally the _praenomen_ and
_cognomen_ are found without the gentile name[3397]; there are also a
few instances of female names.[3398] An exceptional form of signature
is given by CINNA C·L·TITI(_orum_) S(_ervus_); occasionally also, as in
the example from Spain already quoted, FIGVL(_us_) ARRE(_tinus_), or
simply ARRETI(_nus_), are found. Sometimes, again, two potters seem to
have been in partnership, as Sura and Philologus, L. Gellius and L.
Sempronius (L·GELLI L SEMP),[3399] or two firms, as the Umbricii and
Vibieni.

The simple quadrangular form of stamp is by far the commonest, and,
next to this, an outline of a foot; less frequent forms, and of later
date, are the circular, oval, or lunate, and other varieties of marks,
such as wreaths, stars, or branches. Dr. Dressel gives no less than
eighty-seven types from Rome,[3400] of which thirty-three are
rectangular with ornamental edges. The forms of the letters are not
always an indication of date, but such forms as 15[14]Attic alpha
15[15]alpha for A, 15[12]E for E, and 15[12]F for F betoken an early
date. Ligatured letters abound. The names are often written from right
to left, or left to right with separate letters reversed or inverted;
or the words are broken up as

      MVS for Docimus,  MVS for Romanu(s),
      DOCI              ROM

and so on.[3401] The stamps were probably of wood, but some are taken
from seal-rings.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The forms of Arretine vases are all, without exception, borrowed from
metal originals, and in their contours display the same tendency. But,
as compared with the Hellenistic forms they show great simplicity, and
almost, as it were, a return to archaism. The vases are for the most
part of small size, and indeed the dimensions of the furnaces at Arezzo
seem to indicate that larger vases could not have been baked in them.
They are principally cups, bowls, and dishes, the former of
hemispherical or cylindrical form and devoid of handles—a
characteristic which usually distinguishes Roman from Greek pottery.
Some of the moulds for Arretine ware in the British Museum collection
appear to have been used for a deep cup with flat base and spreading
lip (Plate LXVI. fig. 5), of a type which finds no parallel in Greek
shapes, but the hemispherical bowl on a low foot is the prevailing
form. Other shapes are extremely rare, a notable exception being the
beautiful krater in the British Museum with figures of the Seasons
(Fig. 219), which, although found at Capua, is certainly Arretine in
style and technique. The technical methods employed we have already
described in the preceding chapter,[3402] and there do not appear to
have been any variations peculiar to this fabric. Fabroni (p. 37)
states that cinerary urns, tiles, lamps, and reliefs were also made in
the potteries at Arretium.

[Illustration: FIG. 219. ARRETINE KRATER WITH THE FOUR SEASONS (BRITISH
MUSEUM).]

The prototypes of the forms we have seen to be the Hellenistic vases
of chased metal, for which Alexandria was the principal centre. But,
apart from form, it is doubtful whether the Alexandrine toreutic work
exercised much influence on the potters of Arretium. For the
decoration and subjects they undoubtedly drew their inspiration
chiefly from the New-Attic reliefs[3403] and the art of Asia Minor,
as has been pointed out by more than one recent writer,[3404] who
have urged that the influence of Alexandria on Roman art has been
greatly over-estimated.[3405] Dragendorff points out that all the
famous chasers known to us were natives of Asia Minor,[3406] and
thinks that Rhodes was probably the centre of this art. It must also
be borne in mind that the second century was the era of collecting
works of art in Greece and Asia Minor and conveying them to Rome, so
that the examples which were most prominently before the eyes of
Italian artists under the later Republic were just these products of
Greece and Asia Minor in the Hellenistic Age. Moreover, the Rhodian
and Pergamene schools of art were still living when that of
Alexandria was dying out under the later Ptolemies. The mixed style
of art of the first century B.C. is essentially Roman, produced under
the influence of the Greek works then collected in Rome, and does not
extend beyond Italy.

But it is also conceivable that its predecessors in the line of ceramic
development contributed to produce the ware of Arretium. It recalls in
some respects the different Greek relief-wares discussed in Chapter
XI., the Calene phialae of the third century, and the so-called
Megarian or Homeric bowls, in which some have seen the real “Samian”
ware of the Roman writers, dating from the same period. To these
succeeded in Hellenic lands the fabrics of Athens, Southern Russia, and
Asia Minor, to which allusion has already been made, and which often
present similar characteristics to the Arretine fabrics. Nor must it be
forgotten that the earliest Arretine pottery was covered with a black
glaze, which may indeed represent a desire to reproduce the effect of
metal, but is much more likely to be a direct heritage from the late
Greek pottery, which in this respect carried on the tradition of the
painted wares. At all events, two main characteristics of Hellenistic
pottery have plainly left their mark on Roman fabrics: the
disappearance of painting under the influence of relief decoration
imitated from metal, and the cessation of the exclusive use of a black
varnish.

The transition seems to be partially effected by a small group of vases
which have been styled “Italian Megarian bowls” or “Vases of Popilius,”
after the potter C. Popilius, whose name occurs on many of them.[3407]
They form a distinct class, dating apparently from the third century
B.C., on the testimony of the inscriptions; the form is that of a
hemispherical bowl without handle or foot, with very thin walls, and
covered with a slip of varying colour—yellow, brown, or black. These
bowls, too, are a close imitation of metal-work, especially in the
arrangement of the reliefs. The ornament usually consists of long
leaves and scrolls radiating from a rosette on the foot and bordered
above by bands of wave- or tongue-pattern, scrolls, or garlands; the
ground is filled in with stars, shields, and other devices. In the
finer examples a frieze of figures is added, with such motives as
Erotes, masks, dolphins, and ox-skulls repeated. The bowl of Popilius
published by Hartwig is the only one with a definite subject: a fight
between Greeks and Barbarians, which is an undoubted reminiscence of
the famous mosaic at Pompeii with Alexander at the Issus. Eleven bowls
by Popilius are known, two by L. Appius (see Fig. 220), and one each by
L. Atinius and L. Quintius. The first-named potter seems to have lived
partly at Ocriculum, partly at Mevania in Umbria; both he and Appius
also made “Calene” ware. These potters were freedmen, as the use of the
two names indicates. Their work does not show the fine glaze of the
Calene and Arretine fabrics, but is decorative in its effect; each
ornamental motive is produced from a separate stamp, and the potter’s
marks are put on _en barbotine_ (see p. 442).

[Illustration: FIG. 220. “ITALIAN MEGARIAN” BOWL BY L. APPIUS (BRITISH
MUSEUM).]

To sum up with Dragendorff,[3408] it is clear that a careful study of
Hellenistic pottery is necessary for a correct estimate of the Italian
and Roman. As in the case of other arts, it proves that the Romans were
merely receptive, at best only developing what they received. This
development began with the importation of Greek relief-wares with black
varnish, especially from Asia Minor, and their imitation at Cales.
Then, as in Greece, so in Italy, the search for new forms, colouring,
and decoration began and brought about a degeneration of technique.
What the Calene vases are to those of Asia Minor, so are the vases of
Popilius to the “Megarian” bowls. Finally, the finds in Southern Russia
show that even the technique of the red-glazed ware is not an Arretine
invention, but was already known to the Greeks, although first brought
to perfection in Italy.

                  *       *       *       *       *

We must now return to the Arretine vases and turn our attention to
their subjects and decoration, and their place in artistic development.
Dragendorff[3409] divides them into two classes, including with them
the vases of Puteoli, which bear Arretine stamps, and probably only
represent a mere off-shoot of the latter potteries, merely differing in
the quality of the design and in the absence of many of the best types.
These were mostly discovered in 1874, and it is possible that the
krater from Capua (p. 488) may also be reckoned as originating from
this source.

His first class includes the vases of M. Perennius, which form such a
large proportion of the signed Arretine wares. They are characterised
by friezes of figures repeated, or of groups of figures all of the same
size, sometimes divided by pillars or terminal figures.
Ground-ornaments are rare, and the ground under the figures is not
indicated as elsewhere. The subjects include Dionysiac scenes, such as
dancing Maenads, sacrifices, drinking-scenes, the vintage, or Dionysos
in a chariot; Cupids, Muses, and Seasons; Victory sacrificing a bull;
Nereids with the weapons of Achilles; Hieroduli or priestesses dancing,
with wicker head-dresses; banqueting, erotic, and hunting-scenes.
Examples of the latter classes are given on Plate LXVI. The types of
the figures, as in the case of the dancing Maenads, are largely derived
from the New-Attic reliefs (see above).

In the second class, to which belong the vases of P. Cornelius and
those found at Puteoli, a large use of ornament is the most conspicuous
feature. The figures are little more than decorative, or form motives
of a sculpturesque character, and are not, as in the first class,
isocephalous. Naturalistic motives, such as wreaths, are very frequent.
Among the types we have figures like those in the Nile-scenes on the
terracotta mural reliefs (p. 371) and Centaurs derived from Hellenic
prototypes.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                              PLATE LXVI

[Illustration:

  MOULDS AND STAMP OF ARRETINE WARE, WITH CASTS FROM THE FORMER
  (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

         ------------------------------------------------------

Throughout there is a remarkable variety, not only of subjects, but of
ornaments and methods of composition, features in which the Greek
vase-painters at all periods allowed themselves little freedom. The
ornamentation, which usually borders the figures above and below, or
still oftener occupies the whole surface available for decoration,
includes such motives as conventional wreaths and festoons, scrolls of
foliage, and egg-and-tongue pattern; a favourite device is the use of
columns with spiral shafts, often surmounted by masks, between the
figures. But it is often naturalistic as well as conventional, at least
in detail, and only in the general effect is it purely ornamental
rather than a reproduction of nature.

In the figures derived from the New-Attic reliefs and similar sources,
such as metal reliefs on bases, candelabra, etc., the copyist usually
shows a strong tendency to archaism; the attitudes of the figures are
graceful, but somewhat affected. They seldom represent any particular
action or story, but even human figures are merely decorative. Groups
of dancing figures are especially favoured, such as Satyrs and Maenads,
or the Hieroduli or dancing priestesses, who wear a curious headdress
of wicker-work (_calathus_)[3410]; or we see Genii and Cupids crowning
altars and lamp-stands, or playing on musical instruments. Throughout
the parallelism with the Roman mural reliefs (p. 367 ff.) is most
remarkable, whether in the archaising style, the decorative treatment
of human figures, or in the choice of themes: the dancing Maenads and
Satyrs, the Hieroduli, Victory sacrificing a bull, or the figures of
Seasons. Of the last-named a fine instance is the beautiful krater from
Capua, now in the British Museum (Fig. 219), the figures on which are
most delicately modelled. A stamp in the same collection from Arezzo
has a figure of Spring, which repeats the type of the Capua vase (Plate
LXVI. fig. 2: see p. 439).

A somewhat later development, corresponding to the second class
described above, seems to draw its inspiration rather from the
Hellenistic reliefs of naturalistic style, such as Schreiber has
published, dating from the third century B.C.[3411] The figures are no
longer stiff, but free and vigorous, and elaborate compositions are
attempted, some being perhaps excerpts from large Hellenistic
compositions. Realistic landscapes in the Hellenistic style, with rocks
and trees, are largely favoured, and the repertory of subjects includes
Dionysiac sacrifices and processions, combats of Centaurs and Lapiths,
and hunting-scenes. A fragmentary mould in the British Museum is a good
example of the latter, only that here the scene is definitely
characterised as Alexander the Great at a lion-hunt (Plate LXVI. figs.
1, 3). The king is just slaying a lion, which stands over a man whom it
has felled, and Krateros advances to his assistance with an axe. A
wreath which adorns the beast’s neck seems to indicate that it was an
animal specially kept in the royal park for hunting.[3412] The mould
bears the name of M. Perennius.

Dragendorff, in a valuable and illuminating estimate of the Arretine
wares,[3413] points out that they are an example of the tendency, so
constantly occurring in classic art, to imitate one substance in
another. He is further of opinion that they largely reproduce
contemporary originals which illustrate the eclectic art of the
Augustan period, instituting a reaction against Hellenistic art and
forming in their simple shapes a contrast to the _baroque_ forms of
later Hellenistic pottery. The art of the Augustan Age was followed, as
Wickhoff has pointed out,[3414] by a period of impressionism or
illusionist style derived from painting, which is, however, completely
absent from Arretine and all other pottery of the Roman period. It may,
therefore, be fairly assumed that when the impressionist style came
into vogue, the art of the Arretine potter had had its day. All
subsequent wares with reliefs are essentially provincial, and the
origin of their style is uncertain, but it is at all events not derived
from any of the contemporary phases of Roman art.

The vases of the types which we have been describing are not, as has
been hinted already, found exclusively at Arezzo. In Italy they are
found in all parts,[3415] and the stamps of known Arretine potters
occur in large numbers in Rome, as also at Cervetri, Chiusi, Vulci, and
elsewhere in Etruria,[3416] and at Mutina (Modena).[3417] They are also
found all over Campania, at Capua, Cumae, Pompeii, and Pozzuoli. North
of the Alps they occur but rarely, and almost exclusively in Gallia
Narbonensis,[3418] but we have seen that they are found in Spain, and
instances are also recorded from Sardinia, Africa, Greece,[3419] Asia
Minor, and Cyprus.[3420] From these details two conclusions may be
drawn, either that there were various centres scattered over the Empire
for the manufacture of what was currently known as “Arretine ware,” or
that an extensive system of exportation went on from one centre, which
would naturally be Arretium. Certainly there is no difference either
technically or artistically between the Arezzo vases and some of those
found in other places, such as Modena or Capua. Either view has
something in its favour, and it is doubtful whether the question is yet
ripe for solution.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Arretine ware, as we have seen, steadily degenerated during the
first century of the Empire, and at the close of that period had
practically come to an end. The question then arises, What took its
place in Italy? For it will be seen in the following pages that in
discussing the remaining examples of _terra sigillata_ which Roman
potters have left us, we have to deal almost entirely with provincial
wares, made in Gaul and Germany, and exported largely even into Central
and Southern Italy. Not the least striking feature in the history of
Roman pottery is the rapid rise of these provincial fabrics, and the
reputation which they so speedily acquired even in the more central and
more civilised parts of the empire. Yet the manufacture of pottery in
Italy cannot have died out entirely by the end of the first century.
The plain and unglazed wares for domestic or other ordinary uses, such
as the _dolia_ and wine amphorae, of course continued to be made in
Italy as elsewhere, and the list of centres given by Pliny, which we
have already discussed, clearly shows that in the Flavian epoch several
places still preserved a reputation for the manufacture of pottery. On
the other hand, we have no evidence that the pottery made in these
centres had any other than utilitarian merit, or that it represents
what we know as _terra sigillata_, and it is certainly remarkable that
all the ornamental wares found in Italy are either of the Arretine type
or else importations from Gaul, with very few exceptions. Lamps and
tiles, as we have seen in previous chapters, continued to be made
throughout the second and third centuries, but both were essentially
utilitarian in their purposes, and the latter, at any rate, lay no
claim to artistic distinction. The growing use of metal vases by all
but the poorer classes, was also not without its effect on the
disappearance of moulded wares in Italy, and a reference thereto may
perhaps be traced in Martial’s plea for the Arretine pottery (p. 479).

It therefore seems safest to assume that as in the fourth century B.C.
the manufacture of painted vases ceased at Athens, but entered on a new
era of development in Southern Italy with the migration of Athenian
artists to the Hellenic centres of that region, so in the first century
after Christ the manufacture of _terra sigillata_ in Italy—as
distinguished from plain pottery and other objects such as
lamps—gradually died out, owing to the migration of artists and
transference of artistic traditions to the rising centres of a new
civilisation in the country bordering on the Rhone and the Rhine. It
will be our object in the succeeding pages to collect the evidence for
the existence and importance of the potteries in these regions, and to
show, in short, that they for some time supplied to the whole Roman
world all that its representatives were then capable of in the way of
artistic and decorative work in pottery. In the following chapter will
also be more conveniently discussed the vases of Ateius, Aco, and other
potters which represent the transition from the Arretine to the Gaulish
fabrics.

-----

Footnote 3331:

  _H.N._ xxxv. 160 ff.

Footnote 3332:

  _Etym._ xx. 4, 3.

Footnote 3333:

  Hor. _Sat._ ii. 8, 39.

Footnote 3334:

  i. 2, 65.

Footnote 3335:

  ii. 2, 22.

Footnote 3336:

  _Stich._ v. 4, 12: cf. Mart. iii. 81, 3; Lucil. _ap._ Non. p. 398;
  Tibull. ii. 3, 47; Cic. _pro Murcna_, 36, 75; Cornif. Rhet. _ad
  Herenn._ iv. 51.

Footnote 3337:

  _Apol._ 25.

Footnote 3338:

  _Bonner Jahrbücher_, ci. (1897), p. 140: cf. _ibid._ xcvi. p. 25, and
  Blümner, _Technol._ ii. p. 103.

Footnote 3339:

  i. 19; see above, p. 463.

Footnote 3340:

  vi. 344.

Footnote 3341:

  _Agric._ 135.

Footnote 3342:

  Paul. _ex_ Fest. _ed._ Müller, 344_b_; “in Esquilina regione figulo
  cum fornax plena vasorum coqueretur.”

Footnote 3343:

  xxxv. 161.

Footnote 3344:

  Cf. Mart. xiv. 157; “solet calices haec dare terra” (of Pollentia).

Footnote 3345:

  See _C.I.L._ xi. 1147; for recent finds, _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1837, p.
  10 ff.

Footnote 3346:

  _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1837, _loc. cit._; 1875, p. 192.

Footnote 3347:

  xli. 18.

Footnote 3348:

  See generally _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p. 53.

Footnote 3349:

  _Sat._ i. 6, 118: cf. _ibid._ ii. 3, 144.

Footnote 3350:

  xiv. 102: “Surrentinae leve toreuma rotae.”

Footnote 3351:

  Cf. _id._ xiii. 110: “Surrentine cups are good enough for Surrentine
  wine.”

Footnote 3352:

  xiv. 114: cf. Tibull. ii. 3, 48; _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1875, p. 66;
  Marquardt, _Privatalterthümer_, p. 640, note 2.

Footnote 3353:

  _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p. 54; _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1875, p. 242.

Footnote 3354:

  _C.I.L._ x. 8056, 229.

Footnote 3355:

  _Ibid._ xii. 5686, 696.

Footnote 3356:

  See also _C.I.L._ x. 8056.

Footnote 3357:

  _Sat._ ii. 8, 39.

Footnote 3358:

  _H.N._ xxxv. 164.

Footnote 3359:

  xiv. 108; viii. 6: cf. Juv. v. 29: “Saguntina Iagena.”

Footnote 3360:

  iv. 46, 15.

Footnote 3361:

  See also _C.I.L._ ii. p. 512 and Suppl. p. 1008; Déchelette, i. pp.
  16, 111; also _Bull. dell’ Inst._ 1875, p. 250, and _C.I.L._ xv. 2632
  for an amphora found on the Monte Testaccio at Rome with the stamp
  BCM(_a_)TERNI SAGYNTO.

Footnote 3362:

  xiv. 98.

Footnote 3363:

  “O Arretine cup, which decorated my father’s table, how sound you
  were before the doctor’s hand” (referring to its use for taking
  medicine).

Footnote 3364:

  Pers. i. 130: see also _C.I.L._ xi. p. 1081.

Footnote 3365:

  _Storia degli ant. Vasi fitt. aretini_, Arezzo, 1841.

Footnote 3366:

  See above, p. 438.

Footnote 3367:

  _C.I.L._ ii. 4970, 519.

Footnote 3368:

  _Notizie degli Scavi_, 1883, p. 265; Nov. 1884, p. 369, pls. 8, 9;
  1890, p. 63 ff.; 1894, p. 117 ff.; 1896, p. 453 ff.

Footnote 3369:

  See the map in _C.I.L._ xi. pt. 2, p. 1082.

Footnote 3370:

  _Iscriz. ant. doliari_, p. 421 ff.

Footnote 3371:

  _C.I.L._, _loc. cit._, and No. 6700.

Footnote 3372:

  See _C.I.L._ xv. p. 702, Nos. 4925 ff.

Footnote 3373:

  _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1880, p. 265 ff.: cf. _ibid._ 1872, p. 284 ff. for
  the Arretine examples; also _Notizie degli Scavi_, 1890, pp. 64, 68.

Footnote 3374:

  _C.I.L._ xi. 6700, 12, 739.

Footnote 3375:

  Cf. _B.M. Cat. of Bronzes_, Nos. 3043, 3068, 3100, etc.

Footnote 3376:

  Some may be referred to Sulla’s time: see _Notizie_, 1883, p. 269
  ff.; 1890, p. 71 ff.

Footnote 3377:

  _Notizie degli Scavi_, 1894, p. 49.

Footnote 3378:

  Fifty varieties, with the different slaves’ names, are given in
  _C.I.L._ xi. 6700, 435.

Footnote 3379:

  _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p. 70, note 2.

Footnote 3380:

  Rayet and Collignon, p. 357.

Footnote 3381:

  _Inscr. Graec._ xiv. 2406, 28-46; _Notizie_, 1884, pl. 8; _Bonner
  Jahrb._ xcvi. p. 70.

Footnote 3382:

  _Philologus_, lviii. (N.F. xii.), pl. 4, p. 482; Roscher, iii. p.
  2195: see for this potter, _Notizie_, 1896, p. 457.

Footnote 3383:

  _Notizie degli Scavi_, 1896, p. 464.

Footnote 3384:

  _Bonner Jahrb._ cii. p. 119; also found in Spain (_C.I.L._ ii. 4970,
  515).

Footnote 3385:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 5496.

Footnote 3386:

  _Ibid._ x. 8055, 36.

Footnote 3387:

  See _Bonner Jahrb._ cii. p. 119; Déchelette, _Vases de la Gaule
  Romaine_, i. p. 116. A potter of the same date and character is SEX ·
  M · F, found in Etruria.

Footnote 3388:

  _C.I.L._ xi. 6700; _Bonner Jahrb._ cii. p. 125.

Footnote 3389:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 5016.

Footnote 3390:

  _Ibid._ 5572.

Footnote 3391:

  Cf. Déchelette, i. pp. 81, 272.

Footnote 3392:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 5211, 5398.

Footnote 3393:

  _Op. cit._ xi. 6700, 752.

Footnote 3394:

  See on this _C.I.L._ xi. 6700, 2; _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p. 40; cii.
  p. 126.

Footnote 3395:

  _E.g._ _C.I.L._ xv. 5323. No. 5374 _ibid._ has _cognomen_ only.

Footnote 3396:

  _C.I.L._ xv. p. 702.

Footnote 3397:

  _C.I.L._ xv. 4996, 5094.

Footnote 3398:

  _Ibid._ 5515, 5555, 5603.

Footnote 3399:

  _C.I.L._ xi. 6700, 311.

Footnote 3400:

  _C.I.L._ xv. p. 703: see also _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1880, p. 318;
  _Notizie degli Scavi_, 1890, p. 69.

Footnote 3401:

  _E.g._ _C.I.L._ xv. 5179, 5524.

Footnote 3402:

  See also _Röm. Mitth._ 1897, p. 286.

Footnote 3403:

  See Hauser’s work on the subject, _Neuattische Reliefs_, _passim_.

Footnote 3404:

  Rizzo in _Röm. Mitth._ 1897, p. 291 ff.; Dragendorff in _Bonner
  Jahrbücher_, ciii. (1898), p. 104.

Footnote 3405:

  _E.g._ by Schreiber, _Alexandr. Toreutik_, p. 401 ff.

Footnote 3406:

  Cf. _Anzeiger_, 1897, p. 127 ff.; Pliny, _H.N._ xxxiii. 154 ff.

Footnote 3407:

  _Röm. Mitth._ 1897, p. 40 (Siebourg); 1898, p. 399 (Hartwig); _Bonner
  Jahrbücher_, xcvi. p. 37; _Mélanges d’Arch._ 1889, pl. 7, p. 288.

Footnote 3408:

  _Op. cit._ p. 38.

Footnote 3409:

  _Op. cit._ p. 55.

Footnote 3410:

  Cf. _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p. 58: also a mould in the B.M. (Plate
  LXVI. fig. 5), and _Brit. Mus. Cat. of Terracottas_, D 646.

Footnote 3411:

  _Hellen. Reliefbilder_, pls. 1, 9, 10, 21, etc.

Footnote 3412:

  See on the subject, _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p. 73.

Footnote 3413:

  _Ibid._ ciii. p. 103. On the same article the preceding paragraphs
  are also largely based.

Footnote 3414:

  _Roman Art_, Eng. Trans., p. 18 ff.

Footnote 3415:

  See _C.I.L._ xv. p. 702.

Footnote 3416:

  _E.g_. _C.I.L._ xi. 6700, 2, 308, 688, 762.

Footnote 3417:

  _Ibid._ 6700, 29, 306, 786.

Footnote 3418:

  A fine example has been found at Neuss on the Rhine (_Bonner Jahrb._
  ciii. p. 88).

Footnote 3419:

  See Dumont, _Inscrs. Céramiques_, p. 390.

Footnote 3420:

  _Cyprus Mus. Cat._ p. 94, No. 2116, PRINCEPS TITI, from Salamis.




                             CHAPTER XXIII
             _ROMAN POTTERY (continued); PROVINCIAL FABRICS_

    Distribution of Roman pottery in Europe—Transition from Arretine to
      provincial wares—_Terra sigillata_—Shapes and centres of
      fabric—Subjects—Potters’ stamps—Vases with _barbotine_
      decoration—The fabrics of Gaul—St. Rémy—Graufesenque—“Marbled”
      vases—Vases with inscriptions (Banassac)—Lezoux—Vases with
      medallions (Southern Gaul)—Fabrics of Germany—_Terra sigillata_
      in Britain—Castor ware—Upchurch and New Forest wares—Plain
      pottery—_Mortaria_—Conclusion.


                       1. GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS

The pottery with which we have now to deal is that which was known to
an older generation as “Samian ware,”[3421] but may now be more
appropriately termed _Provincial terra sigillata_. In regard to its
general characteristics, it is distinguished by a fine close-grained
red clay, harder than the Arretine, and presenting when broken an edge
of light red. The surface is smooth and lustrous, of a brighter yet
darker red colour (_i.e._ less like coral) than that of Arretine ware,
but the tone of the red varies with the degree of heat used. The most
important feature is the fine red glaze with which it is coated,
similar in composition to—though not identical with—that of the
Arretine (see the analysis given on p. 436); it is exceedingly thin and
transparent, and laid equally over the whole surface, only slightly
augmenting the colour of the clay, which resembles that of coral or
sealing-wax. The glaze varies in lustre and quality as well as in
colour, but as the analyses show, it is produced on the same principle
at all periods and in all fabrics, Italian and provincial. The
ornamentation is invariably of a coarser nature than that of Arretine
ware, and though it draws its inspiration therefrom, is divided from it
by a considerable interval of artistic degeneration; nor is the missing
link always easy to trace. This ware is found all over Central Europe,
from the Balkan to the Spanish Peninsula, in the forests of Germany,
and on the distant shores of Britain, but in greatest abundance and
effectiveness in the valleys of the Loire and Rhine, a fact which in
itself directs us to look to these districts for the centres of its
manufacture. Wherever found, it is in its main characteristics
identical, and readily to be distinguished from the local wares with
their simple, or entire absence of, ornamentation. The vases are
usually of small dimensions, consisting of various types of bowls,
cups, and dishes, of which two or three forms are preferred almost to
the exclusion of the rest, and they usually bear the stamp of the
potter impressed on the inside or outside. The angular and sharp
profiles of the various shapes indicate that in nearly all cases they
are derived from metal prototypes.

Although this ware is found all over the Roman world, yet by far the
greater proportion of the material at hand comes from the Roman sites
of Gaul, Germany, and Britain, and evidence points to two—and only
two—districts as the principal centres of its manufacture: the valleys
of the Loire and the Rhine and their immediate neighbourhood. Even in
Italy the material is exceedingly scanty, and much of the pottery found
in Rome or Campania can be proved by the potters’ stamps to have been
imported from Gaul. In Greece the finds of _terra sigillata_, though
covering a wide area, are few and far between, and we are hardly in a
position to state whether these are local fabrics or importations.
Dragendorff notes[3422] that in the museum at Bonn there are fragments
from Athens, Eleusis, Rhamnus, Oropos, Epidauros, Eretria, Argos,
Delos, and Troy, and others in private possession at the same place
from Alexandria. In the museum at Dimitzana in Arcadia there is a vase
with Latin stamps, and another without stamp is preserved at Chanak
Kalessi on the Dardanelles. Furtwaengler records a few fragments from
Olympia,[3423] one with OCT · SALVE, and fragments have also been found
at Pergamon. There are a few cups from Cyprus in the Museum at St.
Germain-en-Laye, and others at Nicosia.[3424] But it must not be
forgotten that, as has already been noted (p. 476), there is evidence
of manufacture of red relief wares in Greek lands under the Empire, and
much of the above-mentioned material may not be able to lay any claim
to a Western origin.

For the potteries of Central and Western Europe there is indeed no
literary evidence, for, as we have seen (p. 479), Saguntum is the only
provincial place of any reputation in antiquity, although modern
excavations have not upheld its claim. All the evidence is necessarily
derived from excavations, and from finds of moulds and potteries; but
by the careful and scientific researches of Von Hefner, Dragendorff,
Déchelette, and other investigators on Gaulish and German sites results
have been obtained of incalculable value for establishing the
provincial centres which during the first century of the Empire
inherited the traditions of Arretium. In the succeeding enquiry,
therefore, we shall devote our attention almost entirely to the _terra
sigillata_, of which Gaul, Germany, and Britain have yielded such
abundant quantities, and after a general consideration of its history
and characteristics, shall discuss in detail the peculiarities of
separate fabrics.[3425]

                  *       *       *       *       *

In his invaluable treatise on _terra sigillata_[3426]—the first
comprehensive attempt at a general scientific discussion of the subject
which has been contributed—Dragendorff collected a series of over fifty
varieties of forms (almost exclusively cups, bowls, and dishes), which
embrace all the examples of Arretine and provincial wares with
relief-ornamentation. Of these he considers the first fourteen peculiar
to the Arretine ware, but there are other vases found both in Italy and
the provinces which in form and colour are not distinguishable from the
Arretine, and seem to be undoubted examples of early importations. Such
vases are found at Andernach, Neuss, and Xanten on the Lower
Rhine,[3427] bearing the stamps of Ateius, Bassus, Primus, and Xanthus,
who are also frequently found in Southern Italy.[3428] With regard to
the first-named, however, there is evidence to show that he may have
worked in Southern Gaul, and the Italian origin of this pottery is not
absolutely certain.[3429] At all events, the finds in Germany to which
a date in the first century can be given seem to show the adoption of a
new form of dish differing from that characteristic of Arezzo[3430];
this new form is also common at Pompeii (probably as an importation),
and is found on the Limes at Saalburg with the stamp BOLLVS FIC. It is
usually quite plain, and seems to have lasted down to the end of the
third century. Another variety (No. 18) was found at Andernach with a
coin of Antonia Augusta, and at Este in Italy with a stamp SERRAE,
which belongs to the time of Augustus. From it a later form (No. 31)
was developed.

[Illustration:

  FIG. 221. GAULISH BOWL (FORM NO. 29); FIRST CENTURY AFTER CHRIST.
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. 222. GAULISH BOWL (FORM NO. 30);
  FIRST CENTURY AFTER CHRIST.
]

As a general rule these early provincial forms were unornamented, but
the two types of bowl or cup which Dragendorff numbers 29 and 30, and
which are reproduced in Figs. 221, 222, become the normal form for the
provincial relief-wares of the first century. These are not found in
the Arretine ware, but occur all through that century, not only in
Gaul, but also, for instance, in the _castra_ on the frontier of
Germany.[3431] The only Arretine form which seems to have prevailed to
any extent in the provinces is the krater (Dragendorff’s No. 11 = Fig.
219).[3432] Other kinds of deep cups with expanding sides
(Dragendorff’s Nos. 22-27) are found occasionally in Italy and on
various sites in Germany, and can be traced from their first appearance
in the first century for about a hundred years.[3433] Nos. 24 and 25
are found at Xanten (Castra Vetera) with coins of Julius Caesar and
Nero, others in the cemetery of Bibracte near Autun, which is known not
to be later than the time of Augustus.[3434] The general conclusion
seems to be that these wares represent a sort of transitional stage
between those of Arretium and the indubitably provincial _terra
sigillata_. Towards the end of the first century they are supplanted,
notably at Lezoux and in Germany, by the hemispherical bowl
(Dragendorff’s No. 37 = Fig. 223), which subsequently becomes the only
form employed for the moulded wares.

[Illustration: FIG. 223. GAULISH BOWL (FORM NO. 37); A.D. 70-260.]

In pursuing his investigation of the provincial fabrics of the first
century,[3435] Dragendorff begins by discussing various groups of vases
found in Germany which seem to represent a period of transition between
the Italian Roman (and the local native) pottery and the provincial
_terra sigillata_ proper, which is not usually found before the middle
of the century. First we have a kind of light-red ware, formerly known
as “false Samian,” which lacks the strong lustrous sheen of the genuine
_terra sigillata_; the tone Hettner considered to be the result of mere
polishing, without any glaze or slip.[3436] The forms are heavier and
coarser, and are not confined, as in the genuine fabric, to deep cups
or shallow bowls, but include a sort of beaker or tumbler-shaped
cup,[3437] and a slim jar with characteristic incised ornament. They
are found in the oldest Roman tombs at Andernach, about A.D. 60.[3438]
Contemporary with this (from Augustus to Vespasian) was a kind of black
ware with incised linear ornament, resembling that described under a
subsequent heading (p. 515); it bears the same potters’ stamps as the
light-red ware, and is interesting for its close relation to the older
La Tène pottery, showing its origin to be Celtic or Gaulish, not Roman.
The centre of fabric for these wares, which are limited in their
distribution to the Rhenish provinces, Normandy and Southern Gaul,
seems to have been Trier, which place is as nearly as possible the
centre of all the sites on which they have been found; it is further
evident that both the red and the black were made in the same pottery.
Dragendorff styles these fabrics “Belgic,” on the ground that they are
mostly found in the province of Gallia Belgica. It is conceivable that,
as that province became organised in the first century, potters from
Southern Gaul settled at Trier. A pottery of that epoch has been found
there, with remains of black, grey, and light-red ware, and a piece
found at Andernach with the stamp DVRO/CVAVO shows evidence of having
been made at the former place.[3439] The potters’ stamps include both
Roman and non-Roman names. These wares are very rarely found in
Britain.[3440]

We now come to the _terra sigillata_ fabrics proper, which extend from
about A.D. 30 or even earlier to 250, and exhibit a great difference
from the earlier fabrics.[3441] There is no longer any question of
Italian manufacture or of unsuccessful provincial imitations of Italian
ware, but of a provincial fabric of excellent technique and real
artistic individuality. The material for our purpose is supplied by the
Gaulish cemeteries and pottery-sites of the Rhone and Allier valleys,
the Cevennes, Normandy, and Belgium, by those of the Rhine valley and
Southern Germany, and those of Britain. In Northern Gaul this pottery
is found with coins ranging from Caligula to Commodus, and in the forts
on the German Limes, such as those on the Taunus range and along the
Main, the coins extend from Vespasian to Gallienus (A.D. 260), in whose
time occupation ceased on the right bank of the Rhine.

In considering the probable centres of fabric we find a remarkable
correspondence in the potters’ stamps in the most widely-separated
localities, indicating a limited number of centres which had a great
reputation. Thus, for instance, in comparing lists of stamps found in
London with those from Douai in France Roach-Smith noted that no less
than three-fourths of the names occurred in both places.[3442] The same
investigator, now many years ago, was acute enough to deduce the
conclusion from this and other similar evidence that in Britain there
was no local manufacture of _terra sigillata_[3443]; and he has been
justified by more recent researches, based on a much more extensive
command of material. The two chief authorities on this subject at the
present day, Dr. Dragendorff and M. Déchelette, are agreed in their
main conclusions that the centre of this fabric must be sought in Gaul,
and since the appearance of the latter’s treatise on the Gaulish
potteries, there seems little doubt that it was in the first century at
Graufesenque near Rodez in the Cevennes (Condatomagus), in the
succeeding period at Lezoux in Auvergne, where extensive remains of
potteries have come to light. Dr. Dragendorff based his arguments on
the following facts:

  (1) The potters’ names are largely Gaulish.

  (2) Names are found in other parts which are known to be from a
      Gaulish centre such as Lezoux.

  (3) Gallic epigraphical peculiarities, such as [dotted circle] for O,
      [cursive D] for D, and OV for U, are found in the inscriptions.

  (4) Even names of an undoubted Latin type, such as Julios and
      Priscos, end in the Gallic termination -_os_.

  (5) Cursive forms such as 15[14]Attic alpha reversed for A,
      15[12]cursive E for E, 15[12]cursive F for F, and [cursive L] for
      L, are frequently found, as also in Gaulish inscriptions of the
      second century.

That he was working on the right lines has been now shown by M.
Déchelette, who has employed as the basis of his researches the more
conclusive evidence of discoveries, especially of finds of moulds and
remains of potteries. But of this more will be said subsequently.

On the other hand there were two large potteries in Germany, at
Rheinzabern, near Speier, and at Westerndorf, in Southern Bavaria,
where ornamented vases were undoubtedly made. They were apparently not
largely exported, but many of the stamps also occur on the plain wares
from these potteries, implying that the ornamental vases must also have
been made by the local men.[3444] The pottery of Westerndorf begins
about the middle of the second century. Dragendorff notes that of all
the Gaulish potters’ stamps only forty-one have been found in Italy,
and many of these only in Cisalpine Gaul, while others are very rare.

In regard to the forms, the chief fact to be noted is that new shapes
and methods of decoration now appear with the growth of the provincial
potteries, unknown in Italy, and the earlier bowls and dishes are not
found (for instance) at Rheinzabern.[3445] One form of dish (No. 32) is
new, but another (No. 31) is clearly developed from the Italian type
(No. 18). An essentially Gaulish form of deep bowl or cup is No. 33;
another with handles (No. 34) is only found at Banassac. The _mortaria_
with spout and pebbles inserted for grinding (see below, p. 551) now
first make their appearance, especially in the Limes forts and in
Britain. Many of the forms clearly indicate an imitation of metal.
Déchelette notes that of the forms given by Dragendorff (Nos. 15-55)
about twenty in all are found in Gaul, including the three used for
moulded wares (see below, and p. 501).[3446] To these he adds sixteen
new forms, which he numbers 56 to 71, and for the vases with
_barbotine_ or _appliqué_ decoration six more (72-77) must be included
in the list.[3447]

The next feature to be considered in these vases is the decoration,
which is not confined, as in the Italian wares, to reliefs obtained
from moulds, but is also produced by ornaments applied to the surface
of the vase, either in the form of separate figures or medallions
modelled by hand or made from moulds and then attached, or by the
method known as _en barbotine_ (see below, pp. 512, 529). Sometimes the
decoration takes the form of impressed or incised patterns (p. 515),
but these are more characteristic of the commoner wares. For the
present we may limit the discussion to vases in which the decoration is
produced at the same time in the mould.[3448]

Vases of this type exhibit a remarkable monotony of form, being, as
already noted, practically confined to two varieties of the bowl or
deep cup, one with curved, the other with straight, sides (Forms 29 and
30 = Figs. 221, 222), at least up to the middle of the first century.
In the latter half of that century these are supplemented by a third
variety (Form 37 = Fig. 223), and at the same time a gradual diminution
in the sharpness of the outlines, as in the reliefs themselves, becomes
apparent. No direct connection with the Arretine ware can be traced,
either in the forms or in the decoration. The potters’ stamps are found
at first in the interior, as on the plain wares, but subsequently on
the exterior, in the middle of the design.

At first there is a general absence of figure subjects, and the designs
are purely ornamental, or else animals, such as birds or hares, are
introduced as mere decorative elements. An important distinction from
the Italian wares should be noted, viz. that in the latter the wreaths
or scrolls which play such an important part in the decoration are
composed of single detached leaves or flowers, whereas in the
provincial wares the whole wreath is modelled in one continuous system,
either formed of undulating motives, as at Graufesenque, or of a
straight wreath or band of ornaments, as at Lezoux.[3449] On the other
hand the figure compositions are never continuous until the ”free”
style comes in at Lezoux with the second century, but are broken up by
ornaments into metope-like groups. The typical arrangement is that of a
wreath between rows of beads or raised dots, with a triple band of
hatched lines or “machine-turned” ornament above, and rays or
pear-shaped ornaments below, pointing downwards. Sometimes the wreath
is duplicated; or the frieze is broken up into metope-like groups of
animals bordered by ornament, as in the first-century bowls found in
France and Italy, which Déchelette attributes to the potteries of
Condatomagus (Graufesenque in the Cevennes).[3450] With the
introduction of the hemispherical bowls (form 37) comes a new system,
in which the upper edge is left plain, followed by a band of
egg-and-tongue ornament; then comes the main frieze, and below this a
simple wreath. This form and method first appear at Lezoux about A.D.
70, and at Rheinzabern with the beginning of the next century. The
final stage is reached when the decoration consists of figures either
arranged in medallions and arcades, or freely in friezes, a system
which obtains exclusively at Westerndorf, and on the bulk of the _terra
sigillata_ found in Britain. Along with these changes in arrangement
goes a steady artistic degeneration.

As regards the subjects, it may be generally observed that the
conceptions are good, but the execution is poor. In many cases they are
obviously imitations of well-known works, and it is curious that no
Gaulish subjects occur. The types include representations of gods and
heroes, warriors and gladiators, hunters and animals. In general they
are of Hellenistic origin, and include all such subjects as are
characteristic of the art of the period.[3451] At first, however,
purely decorative motives hold the field, in imitation of the Arretine
ware, and it is not until after the disappearance of the latter that
figure decoration is found. We have imitations of sculpture, as in the
types of Venus bathing or the Diana _à la biche_, and of the
Hellenistic reliefs with genre and idyllic subjects, as in the scenes
with fowlers or fishermen.[3452] The “new-Attic” reliefs furnish models
for types, as in other branches of Roman art (see pp. 368, 489), and
Eros, Herakles, and Dionysiac subjects are universally popular.

Among the mythological types Dragendorff has collected the
following[3453]: Zeus, Poseidon, Apollo, Hephaistos, Hermes, Aphrodite,
Artemis, and Athena; Dionysos, Herakles, Victory, Fortune, and Cupids;
Amazons, Giants, sea-monsters, Gryphons and Sphinxes, Pygmies and
cranes; Bellerophon, Aktaeon, the rape of the Leukippidae, and Romulus
and Remus suckled by the wolf. The gladiatorial subjects closely follow
the types of Roman art, and the favourite theme, a combat of two in
which one is worsted, resembles a common type on the lamps (p.
416).[3454] Thus, though the style of art is essentially provincial,
the subjects draw their inspiration exclusively from classical
sources.[3455]

A series of examples from Britain may be noted as covering in their
subjects the ground indicated; they are mostly from Roach-Smith’s
extensive collection, now in the British Museum.[3456] They include a
vase with figures in separate compartments: Diana, Minerva, Hercules,
Bacchus, a man with a cup, and Satyrs and Nymphs; another with Hercules
in the Garden of the Hesperides killing the serpent, Diana, warriors,
and panels of ornament; a third with Bacchus and a tiger, Luna, and
Genii with torches. Others have Apollo with Diana or pursuing Daphne;
Diana and Actaeon; copies of statues of Venus (of the Cnidian or Medici
type); the labours of Hercules, Bacchanalian orgies and processions,
and such deities as Victory, Fortune, Cupids, and Anubis, as well as
Satyrs and Fauns, Gryphons, Sphinxes, and Tritons. On the vase of
Divixtus illustrated in Plate LXVIII. fig. 2, the subjects are Venus at
her toilet, Diana with a stag, and a Silenus carrying a basket of
fruit. The subjects from daily life include hunting scenes of various
kinds; dogs pursuing stags, boars, or hares; combats of _bestiarii_
with various animals; musicians, and gladiators. Ornamentation of a
purely decorative character includes animals and trees, and
representations of fruit, flowers, and foliage, either in scrolls or
interspersed with other objects. Roach-Smith also gives a curious
example from Hartlip in Kent[3457] with two separate friezes of figures
and the potter’s stamp SABINI·M[3458]; on the upper band are Leda and
the swan and a seated goddess with cornucopia; on the lower, Diana with
a deer, under a canopy, and Victory crowning a warrior, the various
groups being several times repeated. The style is very rude, and though
the subjects are classical, the figures and designs are very barbaric,
almost mediaeval in appearance.[3459]

The _terra sigillata_ fabrics appear to have lasted on down to the end
of the fourth century in the provinces, but are by that time not only
rare, but exceedingly degenerate. Some found at Andernach can be
attributed to the reign of Magnus Maximus (A.D. 388), and in others,
apart from the style, the costume of the figures resembles that of the
fourth century[3460]; the potters’ stamps by this time have entirely
ceased.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The names of potters which, as we have seen, so frequently occur on the
provincial wares are nearly all Gaulish in form or origin, and this, it
has been noted, is one of the strongest arguments for the Gaulish
origin of the pottery. The stamps are usually quadrangular in form, but
sometimes circular or oval, or in the form of a human foot; they are
depressed in the surface of the vase, but the letters are in relief.
There is considerable variation in the form of the letters, which are
often cursive (see p. 504), often ligatured, and frequently single
letters or whole words are impressed backwards. The names are either in
the nominative, with or without F, FEC, FECIT, or in the genitive with
OF, OFFIC, etc., M, or MANV; the Gaulish word AVOT for FECIT is also
found.[3461] It is rare to find a potter with more than one name, and
probably few of the Gaulish potters were Roman citizens[3462]; on the
other hand, there are few undoubted examples of slaves’ names. Some
groups of names seem to indicate partnerships, such as VRSVS FELIX,
PRIMI PATER(_ni_), SECVND(_i_) RVFIN(_i_); in other cases the name of
the father is also given, as TORNOS VOCARI F(_ilius_), VACASATVS
BRARIATI F,[3463] but it is not impossible that the formula may mean,
“Tornos the slave of Vocarius,” or, “Vacasatus the slave of Brariatus
made (_fecit_).” In Aquitania stamps occur with FAM(_uli_) or NEPOTIS
added after the name. Some groups of names are peculiar to certain
localities, Amabilis, Belsus, Domitianus, Placidus, etc., being found
only in Germany; other potters give a hint of their origin, adding to
their names ARVE or AR for Arvernus, the district of the Arverni,
corresponding to the modern Auvergne. Vases are found at Lezoux with
the stamp RVTENVS FECIT[3464]; here the name may be a deliberate
intention of the Rutenian potter, to show that the vase was not made
locally. The name Disetus, which is found on the Rhine, occurs in
Gallia Belgica in the form Diseto, the variety being due either to
differences in date or in the place of fabric. Among peculiarities in
the stamps may be mentioned an instance, given among those from
Britain, where the potter from ignorance or caprice has impressed the
stamp of an oculist, intended for a quack ointment, on the bottom of a
cup (found in London, and now in the British Museum).[3465] It reads: Q
· IVL · SENIS · CR | OCOD · AD · ASPR (_crocodes_, an ointment made
from saffron). In 1902 some interesting _graffiti_ were found on
pottery at Graufesenque (cf. those given on p. 239), being apparently
notes made by the potters, such as VINAR(_ia_), ACET(_abula_),
TAR(_ichos_), and so on, as well as the names of the potters and the
quantity of the contents in each case.[3466] But it is not possible to
ascertain the forms corresponding to the names given in _graffito_.

Some peculiarities of the potters’ stamps may be noted among those from
Westerndorf and Rheinzabern, in which certain combinations occur on the
same vase.[3467] Thus at Westerndorf we find:

              COMITIALIS · FE  —      CSS · EROT
              COMITIALIS · F   —   {  CSS · ER
                                   {  CSS · MAIANVS·F
              SEDATVS · F      —      CSS · ER
              CSS · MAIANVS    —      CSS · ER

at Rheinzabern:

              CERIAL · FE      —      CONSTANT
              COMITIALIS · FE  —   {  IOVENTI
                                   {  LATINNI
                                   {  SECVNDAIANI[3468]

The names Comitialis and Cerialis are found on stamps interspersed
among the designs, and therefore made with the vase in the mould, but
those with CSS occur on the rim, and were therefore added subsequently.
It will be noted from the above examples that the names like
Comitialis—Primitivos is another instance—are common to more than one
fabric, but those in the second series are peculiar to one; the latter,
therefore, refer to the actual potter (_figulus_), the former to the
designer of the decoration (_sigillarius_), whose moulds were employed
in more than one place. It is an interesting parallel to the ???a?e?
and ?p???se? of the Greek vases. This conclusion receives additional
confirmation from the discovery of certain types of decoration both at
Rheinzabern and Westerndorf, showing that there was a system of
exchange between the two potteries.[3469] The name CSS is only found at
Westerndorf, and it has been supposed that it denotes C. Septimius
Secundianus, a name which occurs in the neighbourhood. The name of
Comitialis is found on a vase from London in the British Museum,
presumably imported from Germany.[3470]

Representations of potters are not unknown in Gaulish art; and there
are also allusions to them in inscriptions. Some are depicted wearing
the tunic only, and thereby proclaiming their servile condition; others
wear the cloak also, as for instance one Casatus Caratius,
_fictiliarius_, who is represented on a _stele_ at Metz holding a
fluted vase like those made in black ware.[3471] On another, L.
Aurelius Sabinus is represented, with an _amphora_, _olla_, and
_lagena_ in the background, and an inscription which runs, _L. Aurelius
Sabinus doliarius fecit sibi et suis_.[3472] Several inscriptions found
in Germany speak of _negotiatores artis cretariae_, and may be assumed
to refer to what we should call “commercial travellers“ or “agents” for
the sale of the finer wares. In an inscription found at Wiesbaden
Secundus Agricola is mentioned in this capacity, and in another from
Dornburg, Secundinus Silvanus, a native of Britain.[3474] M. Messius
Fortunatus, whose name actually occurs on pottery, is described in
inscriptions as being also _pavimentarius_ (road-maker) and
_paenalarius_ (cloak-maker).[3475]

Apart from the potters’ stamps, some interesting inscriptions have been
found on the vases from Rottenburg in Germany. There are examples with
the names of the consuls for A.D. 237, Didius Caelius Balbinus and M.
Clodius Pupienus Maximus (the first year of their reign).[3476] Others
have the names of the legions stationed in the _colonia_ of Sumlocene
or Solicinium, which this site represents, with the dates A.D. 169
(LOCEN ·A · V · C · MLVI), 248 (C · STI · A · V· C · CDI), and 303, and
the names of the twenty-first and twenty-second legions.[3477] Incised
inscriptions on Roman pottery are common throughout the provinces, as
the pages of the _Corpus_ indicate, but are more usually found on the
plain wares than on the _terra sigillata_. Among the more interesting
examples is a vase in the Louvre, of the first century after Christ, on
the neck of which is incised GENIO TVRNACENSIVM, “To the Genius of
Turnacum” (Tournay)[3478]; another found at Ickleton in
Cambridgeshire[3479] had (_ex ho_)C AMICI BIBVNT, “Friends are they who
drink from this”; a third from Leicester, VERECVNDA LVDIA LVCIVS
GLADIATOR, supposed to refer to a love-token or present from a
gladiator to his mistress.[3480] A vase of black ware from Taplow,
Bucks, in the British Museum has a Greek inscription.

                  *       *       *       *       *

We next come to the discussion of the vases decorated in the method
known as _en barbotine_.[3481] This is exceedingly rare in Italy, and
it is probable that the vases there found are importations; the process
seems to have been invented in Gaul or Germany, and the only parallel
thereto in earlier ceramic art is in the method employed for the gilded
vases of the fifth and fourth centuries (see Vol. I. p. 210). At its
first appearance it occurs on vases of common grey or black unglazed
ware, found at Andernach with coins of Claudius and Nero,[3482] but by
the end of the first century it is also employed on glazed wares, red
or black, and even on the enamelled glazed vases of Gallic or German
origin. The ornamentation is at first exceedingly simple, consisting of
plain leaves, chains of rings, or raised knobs, as on the examples
found in Italy; but it developed rapidly, and the patterns become very
varied. Its chief merit is that it is essentially a free, not a
mechanical method, and some of the specimens from the Rhine and Britain
have really effective compositions of animals and interwoven scrolls.
Even human figures find a place; but towards the end of its popularity
the ornamentation encroaches upon and finally ousts the figure
subjects, and degeneration is manifested in artificiality and crowding
of detail. In the earlier examples there is a marked preference for a
slip presenting a contrast of colour to the clay, and we find white
used on red and black ware, brown on buff ware (early German vases in
the form of human heads), and so on.[3483]

In Gaul, barbotine is limited to subsidiary decorative patterns, and is
never used for figures as in Germany and Britain (see below and p.
544); it is very common in the North of France. At Lezoux it was
employed in the earlier period of that pottery (A.D. 50-100) for simple
leaf-patterns, in the later (A.D. 100-260) to complete the decoration
of vases with _appliqué_ reliefs (p. 529).[3484]

The black glazed wares decorated _en barbotine_ are characteristic of
the second century, and extend down to the fourth.[3485] The clay is
actually red, with thin walls, but is covered with a black or
dark-brown varnish, often with a metallic lustre, which when too much
baked turns to red, and thus presents the appearance of _terra
sigillata_. The barbotine is either of the same colour as the clay, the
varnish being subsequently added _over it_, or composed of white or
yellow slip and applied after the varnish. The decoration usually takes
the form of leaves or scrolls, or of simple raised knobs; but figures
of dogs, hares, and deer are found, and occasionally men.

On the red or _terra sigillata_ wares the barbotine process is not
found earlier than the middle of the first century; there is none, for
instance, at Andernach. It is practically unknown in Italy, and a few
fragments from that country in the Louvre and Dresden Museums are
probably importations. Moreover, it is confined to forms which only
appear with the development of the provincial potteries. The earliest
specimens are found with coins of the Flavian epoch at Trier and
Xanten; it occurs also in Germany and Britain, and there are examples
at Speier from Rheinzabern, but it does not seem to have been made at
Westerndorf. The ornamentation is very limited in its scope, and from a
strictly artistic point of view it was not really suited for any but
simple patterns of leaves (especially those of the ivy or of lanceolate
form) or for running animals. Figures of hunters, gladiators, or
_bestiarii_ are occasionally found. From the very nature of the process
no fine details were possible, and all must be executed in long, thin,
and soft lines. Sometimes, however, scrolls in barbotine were combined
with figures of men and animals made from moulds, as on the Lezoux ware
described below (p. 529). Potters’ stamps are rare, but Dragendorff
gives examples from Cologne, Bonn, and Speier.[3486] It has been
pointed out by the same authority that the influence of glass technique
is strongly marked, not only in the method, which suggests the
imitation of threads and lumps of spun glass, but also in the forms,
which frequently occur in the provincial glass ware of the period, then
rising into prominence.[3487] Examples of British barbotine ware are
given on Plate LXIX.

The other method of decoration to which we have alluded, that of
indented ornamentation, is undoubtedly an imitation of glass technique,
and the forms (flasks and small cups or bowls without feet or handles,
of ovoid or spherical form) are equally characteristic of that
material.[3488] The decoration consists of linear patterns and
sharply-cut ornaments in the shape of an olive or barley-corn, often
combined with naturalistic foliage. This ware may be dated by coins
between A.D. 100 and 250; there are no examples with potters’ stamps,
but it seems to have been made at Lezoux, Trier, and Westerndorf, and
exported to Britain and elsewhere.

What may be described as a variety of this technique, but occurring in
the red glazed wares, is a method of decoration in rows of linear
incised patterns, usually in small rectangular panels of hatched lines.
These belong to the time of the decadence of the ceramic industry,
_i.e._ to the fourth century, and are found chiefly in North and East
France and Germany, not in Central or Southern Gaul. There are examples
from the Department of Marne in the British Museum (Morel Collection).
The patterns are made with wooden stamps, not with the usual running
wheel. Déchelette thinks the method originated in Germany with the
vases of the La Tène period.[3489]

In order to elucidate further the development and characteristics of
the provincial Roman pottery, it may be found serviceable to turn our
attention to the various sites which are known to have been centres of
manufacture, or which have yielded pottery in large quantities, and at
the same time to indicate the main points of difference between the
fabrics of Gaul, Germany, and Britain.

                         2. THE FABRICS OF GAUL

The pottery of Gaul presenting the closest relationship, both
artistically and chronologically, with that of Italy, it will be most
convenient to accord it precedence. Hitherto a general survey of the
Gaulish fabrics has hardly been possible, as the materials had not been
collected and studied as a whole; and such a task was obviously beyond
the capacity of any one who had not the advantage of a personal
acquaintance with the mass of material now available in all parts of
France. But since the indispensable and exhaustive work of M.
Déchelette has appeared, it has rendered superfluous all the previous
literature on this particular subject. This scholar has earned the
gratitude of students by his careful study of the pottery excavated on
certain sites in Southern France, by means of which much light has been
thrown on the Gaulish fabrics of the first century, at the time when
the _sigillata_ industry was just taking root in Gaul, and had hardly
freed itself from Italian influences. In one section of his work he
deals with the finds made in 1895-1900 at Saint-Rémy on the Allier,
about four miles from Vichy,[3490] in another with those of 1901-02 at
Graufesenque, near Rodez, in the Cevennes region,[3491] and thirdly
with the important fabrics of Lezoux.[3492] With these and others of
more or less importance we shall deal successively in the following
pages.

                  *       *       *       *       *

At =Saint-Rémy= no traces of actual furnaces were found, but fragments
of moulds, etc., showed clearly that it was an important centre, not
only for pottery, but also for terracotta figures. As a rule little
chronological evidence is to be obtained from finds in France owing to
the confused and unstratified condition of the remains, or from absence
of scientific records; but in the present case we are fortunate in
possessing a series of homogeneous types belonging to the earliest
period of _sigillata_ ware in Gaul; an entire uniformity of clay,
technique, form, and decoration shows that they must all belong to one
circumscribed epoch, in spite of the absence of coins or other definite
evidence. At the same time it has been possible not only to connect
them with finds at Mont Beuvray (Bibracte), near Autun, which can be
dated not later than 5 B.C., at Ornavasso, on Lago Maggiore (coins of
Augustan epoch), and at Andernach (also Augustan, see pp. 502, 533),
but also to obtain a clue to their originals and prototypes.

[Illustration:

  From _Déchelette._
  FIG. 224. VASE OF ST.-RÉMY FABRIC.
]

The forms of the vases fall under five clearly-defined heads: a
_poculum_, or tumbler-shaped vessel, a _scyphus_ with flat-topped
handles, a straight-sided open bowl, flasks with or without handles,
and of conical form or pear-shaped (see Fig. 224). All the vases are of
white clay, with reliefs, but there are no potters’ stamps, and the
execution is often imperfect; the secret of the red ware seems as yet
unknown, but there is evidence that it was gradually substituted for
the white, and the typical bowl with sloping sides and continuous
scrolls of foliage (Dragendorff’s No. 29 = Fig. 221) introduced here as
elsewhere. In the Saint-Rémy fabrics this bowl only has a single row of
ornament, a tongue-pattern, scrolls, or arcading round the lower part.
The general conclusion reached by M. Déchelette is that down to the end
of the first century B.C. two kinds of pottery were introduced into
Gaul: the Arretine ware, which occurs at Bibracte with the stamps of
Annius, Memmius, and Tettius, and a class of small goblets and flasks
of yellowish clay which in many respects resemble the Saint-Rémy type.
The latter sometimes bear the name of ACO ACASTVS,[3493] a potter who
appears to have worked in the region of Savoy or Piedmont, and who was
inspired by the Arretine technique and style of signature. His ware
also occurs in Lombardy at Ornavasso, and at Klagenfurt in Pannonia,
where a fragment was found (Fig. 225) with his name and an inscription
which runs: “Life is short, hope is frail; come, (the lights) are
kindled; let us drink, comrades, while it is light.”[3494] He certainly
belongs to the Augustan epoch, and may be regarded as the immediate
inspirer of the Saint-Rémy fabrics. Hence about the beginning of the
first century of our era it may be inferred that the potters of
Saint-Rémy and district began to “exploit” the Italian technique, but
following the Gallo-Italic method of Aco rather than the Arretine. The
typical decorative motive by which this pottery may be recognised is a
kind of arcading, which from having floriated points gradually tends to
assume a purely vegetable form. Some of the vases are only ornamented
with rows of raised points, and this feature occurs on others with the
potters’ names L. Sarius Surus and Buccio Norbanus. Figure decoration
is found only on the pear-shaped flasks, in the form of animals (Fig.
224) and bearded heads. To the same period belongs a series of vases
manufactured at Vichy and Gannat in the same district.[3495]

[Illustration:

  From _Déchelette._
  FIG. 225. VASE OF ACO (FIRST CENTURY AFTER CHRIST), WITH INSCRIPTION.
]

                  *       *       *       *       *

The results obtained from =Graufesenque=, in the Department of Aveyron,
have been even more remarkable. This place represents the ancient
Condatomagus, in the country occupied by the Ruteni, and appears to
have been a great centre of the _terra sigillata_ industry. Although it
is not mentioned by Pliny, yet there must have been in his time large
exports southwards from this part of Gaul, even as far as Campania. M.
Déchelette has shown that it supplied not only Gaul and Italy, but even
Africa, Spain, and Britain, to a greater extent than any other
centre—that, in fact, from A.D. 50 to 100 it was the seat of the most
important pottery in the whole empire.[3496]

Remains of pottery were first discovered in 1882 by the Abbé Cérès,
including a series of moulds, which made it certain that this was a
centre of fabric. These discoveries were largely supplemented by
further excavations in 1901–02. Among the moulds are those of certain
potters which are only found here, and consequently afford satisfactory
evidence that such potters can be localised in this region. The potters
were not itinerant, nor were the moulds transferred from one pottery to
another; but the important central pottery seems to have attracted a
group of smaller ones to collect round it, just as we find Cincelli
linked to Arezzo (p. 483), and the moulds could be exchanged from one
to another within this limited area.

The local pottery of Gaul, which in the first century B.C. had reached
a high level,[3497] was interrupted about the time of Augustus by the
invasion of Italian methods, by which it was very rapidly Romanised,
and Gaul became a mere tributary of Roman industry. At first two kinds
of technique were practised—one with a white or yellow clay, as at
Saint-Rémy and Bibracte; the other in the ordinary red ware, which
appears to have been employed exclusively at Condatomagus and Lezoux,
at first following on the lines of the Arretine ware, but subsequently
attempting new developments. Artistically it is inferior to the
Arretine, but it is much more varied. Besides the _terra sigillata_
proper, or moulded ware with reliefs, which is by far the most
numerous, we find in Gaul several other varieties of technique:
_appliqué_ medallions, separately moulded and attached with barbotine,
in imitation of the Greek metal ?µß??µata; barbotine decoration; a
class of so-called “marbled” vases; and incised decoration of simple
linear patterns made with a tool in the moist clay, but with bold and
skilful execution. But practically the wares found at Graufesenque are
limited to the moulded class, and the others, which will be described
subsequently, only became general in the second century, when the
Lezoux potteries came to the front and those of Graufesenque were
exhausted.

In the _terra sigillata_ wares three forms assume marked prominence,
those illustrated in Figs. 221–223; they are found in fairly equal
proportions, but the earliest form, which we may call for convenience
No. 29, has a slight preponderance. We shall see later that similarly
the latest form (No. 37) prevails at Lezoux; this form was introduced
about A.D. 70. The intermediate No. 30 is found at both, but more
frequently at Graufesenque. The only other found in the moulded wares
is a bowl on a high stem, which closely follows the type of the
Arretine krater seen in Fig. 219; it is therefore either common to
Arretium and Condatomagus, or represents a transition from one fabric
to the other.[3498] Déchelette quotes an instance with the stamp VOLVS,
which recalls the Arretine potter Volusenus.[3499]

About three-fourths of the vases are ornamented, the decoration falling
into two categories: (1) an earlier class with ornament only, occurring
on the forms 29 and 30 (see Plate LXVII.); (2) a later with figures,
such as animals or gladiators, the forms being Nos. 30 and 37. Of the
ornamental motives on form 29, there are five principal types[3500]:
(_a_) simple winding scrolls; (_b_) scrolls combined with figures in
medallions; (_c_) scrolls combined with panels of “arrow-head” pattern;
(_d_) bands of semicircles enclosing volutes which terminate in
rosettes; (_e_) figures in metopes. In this form the decoration is
almost always in two friezes, a natural consequence of the shape of the
vase; the metopes or geometrical compartments only come in with form
37. In the latter form seven successive types of decoration may be
distinguished: (a) a transitional system with metopes, derived from the
older form[3501]; (ß) metopes with wavy borders, a

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                             PLATE LXVII

[Illustration:

  GAULISH POTTERY OF FIRST CENTURY AFTER CHRIST (GRAUFESENQUE FABRIC)

  (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

         ------------------------------------------------------

diagonal or cruciform pattern often occupying alternate panels (cf.
Plate LXVII. fig. 2)[3502]; (?) large medallions, often combined with
inverted semicircles (_chiefly found at Lezoux_: cf. Plate LXVIII. fig.
3); (d) arcading (_rare at Graufesenque_); (e) arcading and semicircles
combined; (?) large foliage-patterns or vine-leaves, often interspersed
with animals; (?) friezes of “free” figures (_not found at
Graufesenque_: cf. PlateLXVIII. fig. 1).

In regard to the figure subjects, mythological types are rare, and
generally there is not so much variety as at Lezoux. Déchelette reckons
177 different types in all, of which 112 are peculiar to the fabric,
whereas no less than 793 are peculiar to Lezoux.[3503] Hence, he points
out, the origin of any Gaulish vase may be determined from the nature
of the types alone. In artistic execution they are unequal, some being
copies of popular themes, others of a naïve and unsophisticated
character. Gaulish elements are conspicuously absent. Although the
difference from the Arretine style is strongly marked, there is yet the
same tendency to display the influence of toreutic prototypes, and even
of the “new Attic” reliefs and the _genre_ types of the Hellenistic
period.[3504] But others are original and non-classical in style, and
there is no homogeneity. Each pottery doubtless had its favourite
subjects—a point which may prove of use in determining the separate
fabrics. In any case, figure-subjects only prevailed for a short period
at Condatomagus, whereas at Lezoux and in Germany they extend over a
considerable period. For Gaul did not become Romanised before the reign
of Titus; hence the previous absence of mythological themes. The potter
Libertus (see below, p. 527), who worked at Lezoux about A.D. 100,
stands out as the foremost potter and modeller in Gaul, who, brought up
on classical traditions, influenced the whole pottery of the country.

The question of the chronology of these Rutenian fabrics depends more
upon the results of comparison with other sites than on the internal
evidence of the finds. None of this pottery, for instance, is found at
Bibracte, which was deserted about the beginning of our era; but at
Andernach vases with Rutenian potters’ stamps are found with coins
ranging from Augustus to Nero. They are also abundant at Xanten, Neuss,
and Vechten in Holland. Evidence may also be obtained from the German
Limes, where form 29 disappears about A.D. 30. The exportation of
Rutenian wares, therefore, began about the reign of Tiberius. Their
wide distribution may be traced by a study of the inscriptions in the
thirteenth and other volumes of the Latin _Corpus_.[3505] In Britain
they are found in London[3506] and at Silchester. Out of thirty-four
ornamented vases from the latter site in the Reading Museum, M.
Déchelette attributes exactly half to Condatomagus, representing the
first century, and the other half to Lezoux, representing the
second.[3507] In Italy this ware is found at Rome and Pompeii, and of
the typical Rutenian subjects some twenty have been noted among the
_terra sigillata_ in Roman museums. The potters Bassus, Jucundus,
Mommo, and others of Rutenian origin are found at Rome, whereas the
only one from the Auvergne district there is Albucius[3508]; and the
same names occur at Pompeii, especially that of Mommo, whose stamps are
characteristic.[3509] The latter group of vases, moreover, supply, as
in other cases, important evidence for dating the Rutenian vases; they
show, not only that Mommo and the others were in full activity before
A.D. 79, but that mythological subjects—not found on the Pompeian
examples—were only introduced towards the end of the pottery’s activity.

Another well-known potter who appears to have worked at Condatomagus is
Vitalis, whose signature in full or in the form OF · VITA is well known
there. He is also found as far afield as Carthage and on the east coast
of Spain.[3510] This is additional testimony to the extent and quantity
of exportations from this centre, and to its position as the most
flourishing manufacture in the Roman empire at the time. This
popularity it could never have acquired if the fabrics of Arretium,
Mutina, and Puteoli had not now reached their decadence; nor, if those
of Auvergne, such as Lezoux, or of the Rhenish provinces had been
already in full activity, would the Rutenian wares have penetrated into
Central Gaul and Germany. M. Déchelette notes as an interesting fact
that in some collections of Roman pottery debased wares with Arretine
stamps are to be seen, apparently not later than A.D. 80, and evidently
imitations of Rutenian ware[3511]; these bear the names of L. Rasinius
Pisanus and Sex. M. F., of whom mention was made in the last chapter
(p. 485). There is no evidence that this pottery was in existence after
A.D. 100, and its rapid disappearance is certainly due to the rise of
Lezoux, where, as noted below, Rutenian potters’ stamps are not
uncommon in the first century.

Déchelette has collected forty-three names of Rutenian potters, which
are distributed over two hundred and thirty-two vases or fragments
known to him.[3512] On form 29 the stamps are only found in the
interior of the vases, and hence are not found on the moulds, but both
were probably made by the same potters. Vases of the other two forms
are often unsigned. Of individuals Mommo occurs sixty-three times,
Germanus thirty-eight. The same writer points out that the evidence
from Graufesenque would overthrow any theory of itinerant potters, if
on no other grounds, from the fact that the moulds of a particular
potter are only found on the one spot.

A group of vases which must be mentioned here, though a very small one
and not strictly belonging to the _terra sigillata_, is that of the
yellow ware with red marbling.[3513] It consists of a small group of
bowls and dishes with a dull yellow slip covered with veins of a red
colour, producing a variegated effect. Eight of these were found at
Trier, one with the stamp of Primus, and there are a few others in
German museums. In Southern Gaul, as at Arles, they are more common,
and others have been found at Lyons and Vichy. The British Museum
possesses one from Bordighera and three from Arles, and they are also
known in Sardinia and Southern Italy; there are two at Naples from
Pompeii with the stamp of Primus.[3514] The latter fact gives a
_terminus ante quem_ for their date, and it is probable that some place
in Southern Gaul was the centre of the fabric. Dragendorff suggested
Arles, where stamped examples have been found; but Déchelette points
out that all the potters’ names are Rutenian, and this is conclusive
evidence in favour of Graufesenque; in any case we have here an
instance of exportation from Gaul into Italy. It is not certain in what
manner the marbling has been produced; it is probably an imitation of
glass.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Yet another example of a fabric which was imported from Gaul into Italy
is to be seen in the pottery of =Banassac=, a class of vases with
inscriptions of a convivial character, with letters in relief
encircling the body.[3515] The form is that of the hemispherical bowl
No. 37, the appearance of which at Pompeii shows that it was developed
before A.D. 79. They are found in large numbers in the south of France,
especially at Nismes, Orange, Vienne, Montans (Tarn), as well as
Banassac; at the latter place fragments have been found on the site of
a pottery, showing that they were made there. The most notable example
(Fig. 226) was found at Pompeii, and is now in the Naples Museum[3516];
it is inscribed BIBE AMICE DE MEO, “Drink, friend, from my (cup),” the
letters being separated by leaves, and is of ordinary red _terra
sigillata_ ware. Here, again, it is possible to date the fabric in the
first century, not later than the reign of Vespasian. On the local
specimens are found such sentiments as _Gabalibus felicit(er_), _Remis_
(_felici)ter_, _Sequanis_ _feliciter_[3517]; _veni ad me amica_; _bonus
puer_; _bona puella_; the two last-named recalling the seaside mugs of
the nineteenth century. The convivial inscriptions we shall meet with
again in a later fabric from the region of the Rhine (p. 538). _Terra
sigillata_ was also made here and at Montans in the Department of Tarn;
the decoration is in the form of metopes, denoting the transitional
period (about A.D. 70). No potters’ names are found on the inscribed
vases.

[Illustration:

  From _Mus. Borb._
  FIG. 226. VASE OF BANASSAC FABRIC, FOUND AT POMPEII.
]

                  *       *       *       *       *

The pottery of =Lezoux=, in Auvergne, was first carefully studied by
the late M. Plicque,[3518] who excavated there on a large scale in 1879
and succeeding years, and obtained as a result of his researches no
less than three thousand different potters’ names, as well as the
substructures of about a hundred and sixty furnaces, forty of which
were in good preservation, comprising sixty-six distinct manufactories.
About twenty-three more manufactories were traced along the principal
roads and the banks of the Dore and Allier. He also found numerous
remains of tools, potters’ wheels, and other apparatus. In addition, he
excavated some two hundred tombs containing quantities of pottery,
which seemed to imply a general use of it in funeral ceremonies. The
potteries here seem to have been already in full working order in the
time of Vespasian, and lasted down to about A.D. 260. The earliest date
to be obtained from the evidence of coins is about A.D. 70, but the
earliest fabrics seem to go back to the time of Claudius; the date of
destruction of the site is indicated by coins of Gallienus and
Saloninus found among the burnt ruins.

A large proportion of the vases have potters’ stamps, but there is no
rule about the signatures.[3519] In the vases of form 29 the names are
in the interior, denoting the masters of the potteries; in the later
forms they are on the exterior, having been placed on the inside of the
mould before baking, usually among the ornament. The ordinary formula
is OF, M, or F, with the name in the genitive. As to the distribution
of Lezoux vases, there was, as noted below, little exportation before
A.D. 100, but after that time they prevail over Britain and Germany.
Déchelette gives ninety-two examples with potters’ stamps in Britain,
including twenty-one names. A few specimens have been found in North
Italy; Paternus occurs at Turin, Albucius at Rome.

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                            PLATE LXVIII

[Illustration:

  GAULISH POTTERY FOUND IN BRITAIN; LEZOUX
  FABRIC; A.D. 70-250 (BRIT. MUS.).
]

         ------------------------------------------------------

Of the moulded or _terra sigillata_ wares twelve different forms are
found, of which as elsewhere three prevail to the exclusion of the
others.[3520] The krater type (Dragendorff’s No. 11) is only found in
the earliest period, about A.D. 40-50, and as already noted (p. 520)
forms 29 and 30 are not so common as at Graufesenque, while form 37,
which practically took the place of 29, occurs in great quantities.
Déchelette distinguishes three chronological epochs of development,
covering respectively the periods A.D. 40-75, 75-100, and
110-260.[3521] In the first period the decoration of form 29 develops
in the same manner as at Graufesenque, but with this important
variation, that the running scroll is replaced by a _straight_ pattern
of vine or oak leaves, or bands of rosettes or circles. The colour of
the glaze is lighter than at Graufesenque, the reliefs more delicately
modelled. The potters of this period, all of whom use form 29, are
Atepomarus, Cobnertus, Danomarus, Iliomarus, and Petrecus. It will be
noted that these are all Gaulish names, whereas those at Graufesenque
are all Latin.

To the second period (A.D. 75-110) belong the bowls of form 37 with
transitional or metope decoration, or in the “free” style, which is
employed by Libertus, an important potter of Trajan’s reign.
Exportations now first begin, and examples are found on the Limes, but
generally speaking they are few in number, and while the Rutenian
potteries existed the output must have been limited. After the reign of
Trajan, however, large numbers were exported to Britain and Germany.
The cruciform ornamentation (p. 521) is found on the forms 30 and 37,
and a peculiar type of egg- or astragalus-pattern (borrowed from
Arretium) is used by Butrio and Libertus. Figure subjects, introduced
by Libertus, now become general, especially animals and hunting-scenes
(see for an example Plate LXVIII. fig. 1). The typical potters of the
period are Butrio, Libertus, Carantinus, Divixtus (Plate LXVIII. fig.
2), Juliccus, Laxtucissa, and Putrius.

The third period (110-260) is represented almost exclusively by the
form 37 with decoration in “free” style or large medallions and
wreaths; a few examples of form 30 and the _olla_ (Déchelette’s No. 68:
cf. p. 529) are found. The chief potters’ names are Advocatus, Banuus,
Catussa, Cinnamus (Plate LXVIII. fig. 3), Doeccus, Lastuca, Paternus,
and Servus. Of these, Paternus belongs to the period of the Antonines,
and he and Cinnamus, says M. Déchelette, represent the apogee of the
prosperity of Lezoux, and of its export commerce. The period of
degeneration is marked by the appearance of barbotine decoration and
imitations of metal (see below). It is difficult to say exactly when
the potteries came to an end, but there is no evidence that _terra
sigillata_ was manufactured after the third century, and Plicque is
probably right in attributing their destruction to the German invaders
in the reign of Gallienus.

The wares characteristic of the earlier period include _dolia_ of
coarse clay and other plain fabrics, as well as the various types of
_terra sigillata_. Among the latter are examples of importations from
the Graufesenque and Banassac potteries and other places in the Aveyron
district, but the majority are of local manufacture. These include,
besides the moulded red wares with figured decoration and potters’
stamps, orange-red wares, yellow polished wares (often micaceous), and
black ware with barbotine ornamentation, on which potters’ stamps are
not found. Lezoux was also a centre for the enamelled glazed wares
which have been described in Chapter III. In the later period the red
wares are ornamented with figures from moulds, or with barbotine, or
have lion’s-head spouts (see below). The marbled vases (p. 523) are
also found, and in the third century the vases with _appliqué_ reliefs,
with incised or hollowed-out ornamentation, or bronzed in imitation of
metal, are the prevailing types.[3522]

The salient points of difference between the earlier and later fabrics,
says Plicque, are these. The clay of the earlier is only baked to a
small degree of heat and is not vitreous, but is exceedingly porous. It
is also frequently full of micaceous particles. Subsequently it becomes
more vitreous but less porous; it is more compact and sonorous, free
from mica, and more brilliant and lustrous. In the earlier, the forms
are artistic and symmetrical, the ornament sober and elegant,
remarkable for its taste and simplicity. The figures are enclosed in
medallions, and the ornaments consist of rays or rounded leaves, rows
of beads, and guilloche-patterns. In the later, the art degenerates,
the ornamentation becoming heavy and overcrowded, and the figures are
broken up and badly arranged; the forms of the vases, too, become
heavier. The principal decorative pattern is the egg-and-tongue round
the rim. In the potters’ stamps of the two first periods the letters
have frequent ligatures and abbreviations; the names are often in the
nominative or with OFFICINA _preceding_ the name. Later, the letters
are coarser and ligatures are rare; the names are usually in the
genitive, _followed_ by M (_manu_) or OF(_ficina_). The characteristic
15[12]U for V found in the middle of the second century should be noted.

Among the subsidiary fabrics of Lezoux the most remarkable is that of
the vases with _appliqué_ reliefs.[3523] They are formed entirely on
the wheel, and the decoration is made separately from moulds (p. 440),
and attached with barbotine, either in the form of a medallion or with
an irregular outline, varying with the figure. Barbotine in many cases
is also employed for foliage patterns filling in the background. The
usual form is that of a spherical or ovoid vase (Plate LXIX. fig. 2),
which may perhaps be termed an _olla_,[3524] with short neck and no
handles. It may be noted in passing that such shapes could not
conveniently be moulded, hence the variation of form when we pass from
_terra sigillata_ to other methods of decoration. In the third century
this combined process largely supplanted the moulded wares at Lezoux.
The paste and glaze, however, are identical with the _terra sigillata_.
No potters’ signatures have been found on these vases, but they occur
all over Gaul, including Belgium and Switzerland, and also in Britain.
In the British Museum (Romano-British Room) there are two very fine
specimens found at Felixstowe in Suffolk, one of which is that given on
Plate LXIX. Roach-Smith mentions others from London, York, and
Richborough,[3525] and they are also known at Évreux in France. A good
but imperfect example from Gaul is in the Morel Collection, now in the
British Museum, and has figures of Herakles and Maenads. The modelling
in some cases is admirable, especially in the Felixstowe vases, and in
the London specimens published by Roach-Smith, with masks and figures
of Cupid. These vases represent the latest stage of the ceramic
industry of Lezoux.

Another class of vases made at this centre which may be mentioned here
includes a series of _paterae_, _oinochoae_, and _trullae_ (p. 470)
with ornamented handles, all obviously made in imitation of
metal.[3526] Of the _paterae_ there is a good example in the British
Museum from the Towneley Collection, ornamented with athletic contests
and cock-fights round the edge. M. Déchelette (ii. p. 319) thinks some
of the oinochoae made at Vichy may be imitations of the bronze jugs
which are found at Pompeii, but many seem to be of a later date.

During the period A.D. 100-400, and especially in the third century, a
class of red wares appears at Lezoux in the form of large bowls with
spouts in the shape of lions’ heads.[3527] These were wrongly
identified by Plicque with the _acratophorus_ (p. 464), but they are
clearly mortars (_pelves_, _mortaria_), in which food was ground or
cooked, the spout serving the purpose of straining off liquid. The
lions’ heads are made from moulds and attached with barbotine. Some of
these have potters’ names. As a class they must be distinguished from
the plain _mortaria_ of grey or yellow ware described below (p. 551).

                  *       *       *       *       *

With the South of France it is necessary to connect a series of
medallions with reliefs, intended for attachment to vases of _terra
sigillata_ ware.[3528] In one or two cases the vases themselves have
been preserved, but usually the medallions alone remain; there are also
examples of the moulds in which they were made.[3529] Nearly all of
these have been found in the valley of the Rhone, at Orange or
Vienne,[3530] the rest in other parts of France, such as Lezoux, along
the Rhine, or at Rome (two examples). They were probably made at
Vienne; but there was also a fabric in Germany, examples of which occur
at Cologne, Trier, and Xanten. The subjects of the reliefs are very
varied, ranging from figures of deities to gladiators or even animals;
they frequently bear inscriptions, and their date is the third century
after Christ.

[Illustration: FIG. 227. MEDALLION FROM VASE OF SOUTHERN GAUL: SCENE
FROM THE _CYCNUS_ (BRITISH MUSEUM).]

As long ago as 1873 Froehner published a series from Orange,[3531] with
such subjects as Apollo, Venus Victrix, Mars and Ilia, a figure of
Lugdunum personified, the freeing of Prometheus and the death of
Herakles, Dionysos and Ariadne, a bust of Hermes, a gladiator, a cock
and hens, and a bust of the Emperor Geta, the last-named serving as an
indication of date for the whole series. Several were inscribed, that
with Venus Victrix having CERA FELICIS, which probably refers to the
wax in which the figures were first modelled, though some have thought
that it represents the Greek ?e?a(µ???). Another trio from Orange[3532]
represent respectively:—(1) a chariot race in the circus, with the
inscriptions FELICITER, LOGISMUS (a horse’s name), and PRASIN(_a_)
F(_actio_), “the green party”; (2) Fig. 227, a scene from a play,
probably the _Cycnus_, in which Herakles is saying to Ares, the
would-be avenger of his son, “(Invicta) virtus nusquam terreri potest,”
the god proclaiming “Adesse ultorem nati me credas mei”; in the
background, on a raised stage or ?e????e???, are deities; (3) an actor
in female costume. There are also three in the Hermitage Museum at
Petersburg, of which two represent Poseidon, the third Hermes.[3533]
Caylus also gives a representation of a vase with three such
medallions, with busts of Pluto and Persephone, Mars and Ilia, and two
gladiators.[3534] Where gladiators with names appear it may be assumed
that they are portraits of real people, and Déchelette argues from this
that the vases were made specially in connection with gladiatorial (or
theatrical) performances.

[Illustration:

  From _Gaz. Arch._
  FIG. 228. MEDALLION FROM VASE OF SOUTHERN GAUL: ATALANTA AND
  HIPPOMEDON.
]

An interesting group found at Vienne and Vichy[3535] have subjects
taken from the Thirteenth Iliad, such as Deiphobos and the Locrian
Ajax, or Hector fighting the Achaeans. Among the remaining examples
known the most interesting are three from Orange, one of which
represents a festival in honour of Isis, the other two, the victory of
Hippomedon over Atalanta (Fig. 228), with an inscription of three lines:

              Respicit ad malum pernicibus ignea plantis,
              Quae pro dote parat mortem quicumque fugaci
              Velox in cursu cessasset virgine visa.[3536]

Reference has already been made to a paper by M. Blanchet, in which he
gives a list of the sites in Gaul on which pottery appears to have been
made (see p. 443). But in the majority of these cases plain wares must
have been the only output. Moulded wares, as Déchelette points out,
required skill and resource to produce.[3537] In any case, very few
types are found on moulded wares which cannot be also associated with
Graufesenque or Lezoux, and any made on other sites must have followed
the same methods of decoration.[3538] The places given in Blanchet’s
list cover practically the whole extent of France, though the principal
centres of activity were always the Aveyron and Allier districts and
the Rhone valley. In the neighbourhood of Lezoux, for instance, vases
were made at Clermont-Ferrand, Lubié, St.-Bonnet, and Thiers. At
Nouâtre, Indre-et-Loire, was an important pottery, not yet fully
investigated; and others were at Rozier (Lozère), Auch (Gers),
Montauban, Luxueil (Haute-Saône), St.-Nicholas near Nancy, and Aoste
(Isère), where vases of characteristic originality were made.[3539] But
it is not likely that any future investigations will displace
Graufesenque and Lezoux as the chief centres for Gaulish _terra
sigillata_.

                       3. THE FABRICS OF GERMANY

In Germany the oldest and one of the most important sites for pottery
is Andernach,[3540] between Bonn and Coblenz, where however, it must be
borne in mind, there was no local manufacture; its importance is mainly
as a site yielding valuable chronological evidence. The finds extend
from the beginning of the first century down to about A.D. 250, the
earlier objects finding parallels in cemeteries at Trier and Regensburg
which can be similarly dated. Generally speaking, it has been observed
that Roman remains begin on the left bank of the Rhine a century
earlier than those in the border forts on the Limes, which cover the
period from A.D. 100 to 250.

_Terra sigillata_ with reliefs is comparatively rare, though, as we
have seen, it was at an early period exported from Gaul, and the
pottery consists chiefly of ordinary wares, red, grey, and black,
usually of good and careful execution, with thin walls. Much of this
common pottery may be assumed to be of local manufacture. The
characteristic types of the first century are simple jugs of plain ware
without slip for funerary or domestic use; vases with white slip (also
found at Regensburg); black ware bowls and dishes, sometimes with
potters’ stamps; black and grey cinerary urns. These forms include
small urns and the usual cups and bowls with straight or sloping sides,
replaced after A.D. 100 by spherical-bodied jars with narrow necks. The
decoration comprises all the varieties we have included in the
foregoing survey: barbotine, incised linear patterns, impressed
patterns made with the thumb, and raised ornaments such as plain knobs
or leaves worked with the hand. In the third century painted decoration
is introduced, as in the black ware drinking-vessels with inscriptions
described below (p. 537).

At Xanten (Castra Vetera), lower down the Rhine, large quantities of
_terra sigillata_ have been found, which can be dated by means of
coin-finds from the beginning of the first century down to the third.
During this period a steady degeneration in the pottery may be
observed, although glass fabrics correspondingly improve; in the time
of the Antonines the clay is coarse and often artificially coloured
with red lead or other ingredients, producing what was formerly known
as “false Samian” ware.[3541]

An exceptionally interesting centre, and in some respects the most
important in Germany, is that at =Westerndorf= on the Inn, between
Augsburg and Salzburg, where the coins range from about A.D. 160 to
330. It was first explored in 1807 and as long ago as 1862 the results
were carefully investigated and summarised by Von Hefner in a still
valuable treatise.[3542] The pottery includes _terra sigillata_ of the
later types, and plain red, yellow, and grey wares, sometimes covered
with a non-lustrous grey or reddish slip, or with black varnish, the
latter have very thin walls and are baked very hard. The decoration of
the _terra sigillata_ comprises all the usual types,[3543] the forms
being also those prevalent elsewhere, with the addition of a covered
jar or _pyxis_, but the figures are confined to the cylindrical or
hemispherical bowls (Nos. 30 and 37).[3544] The plain wares include
cinerary urns, deep bowls or jars, with simple ornament, open bowls
with impressed patterns, and _mortaria_.

Of some peculiarities of the potters’ stamps we have already spoken (p.
510); they are found in the form of oblongs or human feet, and more
rarely in circles, half-moons, or spirals, the letters being both in
relief and incised. Trade marks were sometimes used, the potter Sentis,
for instance, using a thorn-twig by way of a play on his name. Names
are both in the nominative and genitive, with some abbreviated form in
the one case of FECIT, in the other of MANVS or OFFICINA.[3545] Local
names are clearly to be seen in those of Belatullus, Iassus, and
Vologesus.

Another important centre of fabric in Germany is =Rheinzabern=
(Tabernae Rhenanae) near Speier, which probably shared with Westerndorf
a monopoly of the moulded wares.[3546] The pottery found here is mostly
in the Speier Museum; it is almost all of form 37, with its typical
decoration, and the fabric does not seem to have been established
before the second century. The chief potters’ names are Belsus,
Cerialis, Cobnertus, Comitialis, Julius, Juvenis, Mammillianus,
Primitivus, and Reginus. The British Museum possesses moulds for large
bowls with free friezes of animals, one with the stamp of
Cerialis[3547]; there was little export to Gaul, but a considerable
amount to Britain. M. Déchelette notes the similarity of the types to
those of Lezoux, and suggests that Rheinzabern is an offshoot from the
latter pottery. This site has also produced barbotine wares,[3548]
which bear a remarkable superficial resemblance to that of Castor (see
below, p. 544), and have been wrongly identified therewith[3549]; but
they are not found at Castor, and in point of fact differ widely in
artistic merit, being far superior to the British fabric, as has been
pointed out by Mr. Haverfield.[3550] The ornamentation is a formal and
conventional imitation of classical models, whereas the Castor ware is
only classical in its elements, and is otherwise barbaric yet
unconventional.

It is possible that Trier, and in fact all places mentioned in a
preceding chapter (p. 453) as sites of kilns may be regarded as centres
of manufacture, though in only a few cases was anything made beyond the
ordinary plain wares. Of the latter a useful summary has been made by
Koenen,[3551] chiefly from the technical point of view, which it may be
worth while to recapitulate. He divides the pottery of the Rhine
district (which may be taken as typical) into three main classes: the
first transitional from the La Tène period[3552] to Roman times; the
second, native half-baked cinerary urns; the third, Roman pottery,
ousting the other two. The first two classes cover the local hand-made
wares of grey, brown, or black clay, which are clearly of native make,
and like the similar wares of Britain and Gaul hardly come under the
heading of Roman pottery, though subsequently they felt its influence.
The Roman pottery proper (which can be well studied in the museums of
Bonn, Trier, and elsewhere on the Rhine) is divided by Koenen into
three periods: Early, Middle, and Late Empire. Roman wares first appear
with coins of Augustus, and at this period exercise much influence on
the La Tène types, producing a sort of mixed style, usually of greyish
or black clay with impressed or incised ornament, subsequently replaced
by barbotine. The _terra sigillata_ is either of the superior deep red
variety with sharp outlines and details, which we have seen to emanate
from Gaul, or else plain ware of a light red hue (“false Samian”),
without ornament.[3553] But as Hölder has pointed out,[3554] the
settlement of the chronology of German pottery (apart from the
_sigillata_) is particularly difficult, because we are dealing with a
purely utilitarian fabric, which consequently preserved its forms
unaltered through a considerable period; moreover, there must have been
many local fabrics and little exportation, which makes comparison
difficult.

[Illustration: FIG. 229. GERMAN JAR WITH CONVIVIAL INSCRIPTION (BRITISH
MUSEUM).]

To the German fabrics belong a group of vases with painted inscriptions
found on the Lower Rhine, and less frequently in North and East
France.[3555] They occur in the second century at the Saalburg, and
last down to the fourth; large numbers have also been found at Trier,
and other examples at Mesnil and Étaples (Gessoriacum) in France.[3556]
The usual form is that of a round-bellied cup or jar (Fig. 229), with a
more or less high stem and plain moulded mouth. Their ornamentation is
confined to berries, vine-tendrils, and scrolls, at first naturalistic,
afterwards becoming conventionalised; but their chief interest lies in
the inscriptions, which, like those of the Banassac type described
above (p. 524), are of a convivial character. They are painted in bold
well-formed capitals, in the same white pigment which is used for the
ornamentation; the following examples will serve as specimens:

          AMAS ME, AMO, AMO TE CONDITE.[3557]
          AVE, AVE COPO, AVETE.[3558]
          BELLVS SVA(_deo?_).[3559]
          BIBE, BIBATIS, BIBAMVS PIE, BIBE VIVAS, BIBE VIVAS
            MVLTIS ANNIS.[3560]
          DA BIBERE, DA MERVM, DA MI, DA VINVM.[3561]
          DE ET DO, DOS (= d??).[3562]
          EME.[3563]
          FAVENTIBVS.[3564]
          FELIX.[3565]
          FE(r)O VINVM TIBI DVLCIS.[3566]
          GAVDIO.[3567]
          IMPLE.[3568]
          LVDE.[3569]
          MISCE, MISCE MI, MISCE VIVAS.[3570]
          MITTE MERVM.[3571]
          PETE.[3572]
          REPLE, REPLE ME COPO MERI.[3573]
          SESES = ZESES = ??sa??.[3574]
          SITIO, SITIS.[3575]
          VALE, VALIAMVS.[3576]
          VINVM, VINVM TIBI DVLCIS.[3577]
          VITA.[3578]
          VIVE, VIVAS, VIVAMVS, VIVAS FELIX, VIVE BIBE MVLTIS.[3579]

To this list must be added a remarkable vase of the same class found at
Mainz in 1888,[3580] with the inscription ACCIPE M(_esi_)TIE(_n_)S ET
TRADE SODALI, “Take me when you are thirsty and pass me on to your
comrade.” Above the inscription are seven busts of deities, Sol, Luna,
Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn, representing the seven days
of the week; both the design and the inscription, however, are incised,
not painted.

        4. ROMAN POTTERY IN THE NETHERLANDS, SPAIN, AND BRITAIN

In =Holland and Belgium= finds of _terra sigillata_ and potters’ stamps
are recorded from various sites, such as Arentsburg, Rossem, Rousse,
near Oudenarde, Voorburg, between Utrecht and Leyden, and
Wyk-by-Durstede, and also at Utrecht.[3581] At Vechten near Utrecht,
the ancient Fictio on the road from Lugdunum (Leiden) to Noviomagus
(Nimeguen) finds were made in 1868 which confirm the activity of the
Rutenian potters in the first century.[3582] These discoveries included
coins extending from the Republican period down to Trajan, and _terra
sigillata_ of the Graufesenque type, with many names of potters
belonging to that region.

In =Spain= finds have been made on various sites, and there are
numerous examples in the museum at Tarragona[3583]; at Murviedro, the
site of the ancient Saguntum, which, as we have seen, is mentioned by
Pliny and Martial as an important centre, various kinds of Roman ware
have come to light, some with potters’ stamps, but no evidence remains
of potteries or of any local manufacture.

                  *       *       *       *       *

In =Britain=—at least in England—finds of Roman pottery have been so
plentiful and so universal that it is difficult to select typical
centres for discussion. It must also be borne in mind that, with the
exception of the plain wares and a few other fabrics, such as the
Castor ware, we have not to deal with local manufactures. A certain
quantity of _terra sigillata_ may have been imported from Germany
(_e.g._ from Westerndorf),[3584] but by far the greater proportion is
from Gaul, as is shown by the potters’ names.

We propose in the first place to review briefly the types of _terra
sigillata_ which occur in Britain.[3585] The bowls of forms 29 and 30,
which are found in Germany in the first century, do not occur on the
Roman Wall, and we have already seen that they are not later than
Hadrian’s time; but they are common in the South of Britain, as at
London and Colchester. Roach-Smith[3586] and other earlier writers have
published specimens of these older forms decorated with figures which
have been found in London, Bath, York, Caerleon,[3587] and elsewhere.
The earliest dateable examples of form 37 have been found with coins of
Nerva at Churchover in Warwickshire[3588]; this type is indeed common
all over Britain, and is one of the few varieties of _terra sigillata_
occurring in the North. It is found at South Shields, along the Roman
Wall, and in Scotland at Birrens in Dumfriesshire.[3589] Pottery of the
second century is represented by a variety of the same form, with a
moulded ridge breaking the outline in the middle[3590]; this would seem
to be a type which also occurs in Germany during the second and third
centuries. Mr. Haverfield states that this form is found at South
Shields and in Yorkshire, and is imitated at Silchester. Of the
principal subjects on these we have already given some description (p.
508). Finally, there is the wide shallow type, approximating to the
mortar or _pelvis_, the upper part of which forms externally a flat,
vertical band, projecting beyond and forming a tangent with the general
curve of the bowl; this is usually ornamented with lions’ heads in
relief. This variety is not earlier than the second century, and is
also found in the third; we have already seen that it was made at
Lezoux.[3591]

It is important to note that all the places mentioned as yielding bowls
of forms 29 and 30 were occupied at least as early as A.D. 85, perhaps
as early as A.D. 50. But the style of these bowls may have lasted
longer; at all events, the varieties are so numerous as to show a
development for which some time is required. There is also a distinct
development in the plain band round the upper edge of the bowl, which,
at first a mere beading, becomes broader and more vertical by degrees.
It may, however, be assumed that, as none are found north of York, it
disappeared from Britain, as from Gaul and Germany, before A.D. 100.

The ware formerly known as “false Samian” (Dragendorff’s
_hellroth_)[3592] appears in several varieties. The light red or orange
colour is produced by a kind of slip of pounded pottery laid over the
surface. Vases of this type, glazed within and without with a thin
reddish-brown and somewhat lustrous glaze, occur in London, and a good
specimen was found many years ago at Oundle in Northants, but has since
disappeared.[3593] It was a fine vase, of light-red clay with red-brown
glaze, resembling the Gaulish _terra sigillata_, and had some claim to
artistic merit. The subject was Pan holding up a mask, and three draped
figures, and it bore the stamp of the Gaulish potter Libertus (OF ·
LIBERTI), who, as we have seen, worked at Lezoux.[3594] This ware is
often coarse, and ornamented externally with rude white scrolls painted
in opaque colour,[3595] and there is a variety found at Castor, of red
glazed ware with a metalloid lustre, the clay itself varying from white
to yellowish-brown or orange.[3596] Both shapes and ornaments resemble
those of the Castor black ware (see below), and it seems likely that
this is actually a local fabric, the difference in colouring being due
to the degree of heat employed in the firing.

The number of potters’ names found on these wares in Britain is very
large, those in the seventh volume of the Latin _Corpus_ amounting to
about 1,500.[3597] This list, published in 1873, of course superseded
all those previously drawn up by the Hon. R. C. Neville, by
Roach-Smith, and by Thomas Wright.[3598] Roach-Smith, however,
performed a useful service in tabulating the list of names found in
London along with those from Douai and other sites in France,[3599]
which went far to prove the Gaulish origin of the British _terra
sigillata_. It is not, therefore, necessary to discuss the potters’
names found in Britain in further detail.[3600] Besides the potters’
stamps, incised inscriptions sometimes occur on the pottery, giving the
owner’s name or other items of information (see above, p. 512).

To give a detailed account of all the sites in Britain on which Roman
pottery has been found would be a task entailing more labour and
occupying more space than the results would justify. Not only do the
sites cover almost the whole of the country from the Roman Wall to the
Isle of Wight, and from Exeter to Norfolk, but the disinterring of the
material from miscellaneous and often unscientific records, or from
scattered and uncatalogued collections, would be a truly gigantic
achievement. It should, however, be achieved; but this will only be by
co-operation, each county performing its share of the work, as has been
done in a few cases. The Society of Antiquaries has issued
archaeological surveys of certain counties,[3601] which without
entering into details tabulate the sites of Roman remains; and it is to
be hoped that forthcoming volumes of the _Victoria County History_ will
do for other counties what those already published have done for
Hampshire, Norfolk, Northants, etc. The most representative collections
are those of the British Museum and the Guildhall in London, and of the
provincial museums at Colchester, Reading, York, and elsewhere.

We now turn to the consideration of the local products of
Romano-British potters. Exclusive of the plain unornamented wares which
were made in many places, as the numerous remains of kilns show (cf. p.
454), there are only three distinct fabrics to be mentioned. In all of
these the ware is black, with or without a glaze, but the style of
ornamentation varies.

By far the most important centre, not only for the quantity of pottery
it has yielded and the extent of its furnaces, but also for the
artistic merit of its products, is that of =Castor=, in
Northamptonshire. Of the numerous traces of furnaces and workshops
discovered here, in the neighbouring villages of Wansford, Sibson,
Chesterton, and in the Bedford Purlieus, we have already spoken in a
previous chapter (p. 444 ff.); it now only remains to discuss the
technical and artistic aspects of the pottery.

Artis has recorded that the pieces of pottery found in or near the
kilns show great variety of form and style, including the red
imitations of _terra sigillata_, pieces ornamented with
“machine-turned” patterns,[3602] and dark-coloured ware with reliefs or
ornament in white paint. But the characteristic and commonest Castor
ware has a white paste coloured by means of a slip with a dark
slate-coloured surface; the usual form is that of a small jar on a stem
with plain cylindrical mouth. Some are merely marked with indentations
made by the potter’s thumb,[3603] or with rude patterns laid on the
intervening ridges; but others have designs laid on _en barbotine_ in a
slip of the same colour as the vase, and others of rarer occurrence are
decorated in white paint with conventional foliated patterns,[3604]
somewhat resembling the Rhenish wares described on p. 537. Haverfield
reproduces a fragment of a vase on which are painted in white and
yellow a man’s head in peaked cap, and an arm holding an axe.[3605] The
barbotine variety is the most typical, and is by no means confined to
this site. It is often found in Central and Eastern England, and even
in the Netherlands. One of the finest specimens was found at Colchester
in 1853,[3606] containing calcined bones, and ornamented with figures
over which inscriptions are incised. The subjects, arranged in friezes,
include two stags, a hare, and a dog, interspersed with foliations; two
men training a dancing-bear, one of whom holds a whip and is protected
by armour; and a combat of two gladiators (_murmillo_ and _Thrax_) of a
type familiar to us from Roman lamps (see p. 416). Over the heads of
the men with the bear is inscribed, SECVNDVS MARIO; over the
gladiators, MEMN(_o_)N SAC · VIIII and VALENTINV · LEGIONIS · XXX,
respectively. The meaning of the inscriptions is not quite clear, but
the last one certainly seems to allude to games taking place at the
post of the thirtieth legion—_i.e._ the Lower Rhine. For this and other
reasons Mr. Haverfield is of opinion that the vase may have been made
in that district and not at Castor, and it is not, of course,
impossible that such ware was not confined to Britain.[3607] This
would, at any rate, explain its presence in the Netherlands. Mr. Arthur
Evans has noted the presence of an unfinished piece of Castor ware in a
kiln at Littlemore, near Oxford.[3608]

         ------------------------------------------------------

                                                              PLATE LXIX

[Illustration:

  TYPES OF ROMANO-BRITISH POTTERY: CASTOR WARE, ETC.

  THE VASE WITH INCISED PATTERNS IS FROM GAUL (BRITISH MUSEUM).
]

         ------------------------------------------------------

Hunting-scenes are also very popular, especially a huntsman spearing a
boar, or a hare or deer chased by stags, as on a fine vase found at
Water Newton, Hunts, in 1827.[3609] A specimen in the British Museum
with a race of four-horse chariots is illustrated on Plate LXIX.
Roach-Smith gives a remarkable specimen with a mythological subject,
that of Herakles and Hesione[3610]; the subject is curiously treated,
Hesione being chained down with heavy weights. Another interesting but
fragmentary vase from Chesterford in Essex has figures of Jupiter,
Mars, Mercury, and Venus, and it may be assumed that the complete
subject was that of the seven deities represented by the days of the
week.[3611] Otherwise the potter is content with animals, such as
dolphins or fishes, or mere foliations, ivy-wreaths, engrailed lines,
and other ornamental patterns.[3612]

In regard to the technique of these wares, Artis notes that the
indented patterns were made while the vase was “as pliable as it could
be taken from the lathe”; for the barbotine the thumb or a rounded
instrument was employed. Figures of animals were executed with a kind
of skewer on which the slip was placed, a thicker variety being used
for certain parts to heighten the relief, and a more delicate
instrument for features and other details. No subsequent retouching was
possible. The vases were glazed subsequently to the application of the
barbotine; on the other hand, the decoration in white paint was made
after glazing. The glaze was, as we have seen in Chapter XXI., p. 448,
produced by a deposit of carbon, by the process known as “smothering”;
it varies in quality, being either dark without any metallic lustre, or
with a metalloid polish resembling that produced with black-lead.

The date of the Castor ware is difficult to ascertain, but it must
begin fairly early in the Roman period, on account of its affinities
with late Celtic pottery. Déchelette (ii. p. 310) would date the ware
towards the end of the third century. As has already been pointed out
(p. 536), it is only the elements of the decoration that are classical;
they are treated in a rude, debased manner, with the free
unconventional handling characteristic of barbaric art. “They are not
an imitation, but a recasting” according to the traditions of late
Celtic or Gaulish art,[3613] such as is displayed, for instance, in the
ancient British and Gallic coinage. The fantastic animals, the
treatment of the scrolls, and the dividing ornaments of beading, etc.,
between the subjects are essentially unclassical. Potters’ stamps on
this ware are exceedingly rare, an almost isolated instance being
CAMARO · F on a vase found at Lincoln.[3614]

Two other local varieties of black ware peculiar to Britain are those
known respectively as Upchurch and New Forest ware. Although no remains
of kilns have been found in the former district, the pottery is
obviously local, and its manufacture appears to have extended along the
banks of the Medway from Rainham to Iwade, over what are now marshes,
but was then firm ground. The remains consist of a thin finely-moulded
bluish-black fabric, with graceful and varied forms, ornamented with
groups of small knobs in bands, squares, circles, wavy, intersecting,
or zigzag lines, or a characteristic pattern of concentric semi-circles
resting on bands of parallel vertical lines (Plate LXIX. fig. 6). This
ware has also been found on the Continent, and may either have been
exported or else made in other places besides Upchurch; it is probably
of quite late date.[3615]

The clay is soft and easily scratched, and is covered with a polish or
lustre produced by friction; the composition is fine, and the walls
thin and well turned. It varies in tone from greyish, like that of
London clay, to a dull black. The vases are mostly small (cups,
bottles, jugs, small jars, and occasional _mortaria_), and some have
ribbed sides; the ornamentation is always either in the form of
impressed lines or raised patterns made by applying pieces of clay
before the vase was baked. No potters’ stamps have come to light, nor
is this ware found with coins or other Roman remains. Rough earthenware
was also made in the Medway district, of a red, yellow, or stone colour.

The New Forest ware is found in the north-west part of the Forest,
between Fordingbridge and Bramshaw.[3616] It is sometimes spoken of as
“Crockhill ware,” from the local name of the site of the furnaces, of
which traces were found in 1852. The pottery consists of two varieties,
one of thin, hard, slate-coloured ware, with patterns of leaves or
grass painted in white (Plate LXIX. fig. 5); these are small jars,
averaging six inches in height, sometimes moulded by the potter’s thumb
into an undulating circumference. There are points of resemblance with
the Castor ware. The other variety consists of a thicker ware, with a
dull white-yellowish ground and coarse foliated patterns painted in red
or brown, usually platters or dishes. It is a rude and inartistic
fabric, of obviously native origin and resembling Celtic rather than
any Roman or Italian pottery. It is found on other sites in Hampshire,
such as Bitterne (Clausentum), and even as far north as Oxford.[3617]
The date is probably the third century of our era. With the kilns there
were found heaps of potsherds which had been spoiled in the baking and
rejected; they were vitrified so as to resemble stoneware, and when
again submitted to the action of fire, cracked and split. The glaze
with which the local blue clay had been covered was of a dark-red
colour and alkaline nature, but had probably been affected by imperfect
firing.

                          5. PLAIN ROMAN WARES

The plain unornamented and unglazed Roman pottery which answered to the
modern earthenware has usually been considered by writers on the
subject in a different category from the glazed and ornamented wares.
Although from the very simplicity of its character it defies scientific
classification, yet it must be remembered that this common ware was not
likely to have been exported very far from the place of its origin, and
therefore where any differences can be observed in the nature or
appearance of the clay, in peculiarities of form or of technique, it is
not impossible to establish the existence of a local fabric. But up to
the present little has been done except in isolated instances. Certain
local wares have been recognised in Britain, as will be noted below,
besides the Castor, Upchurch, and New Forest wares, some of which
almost come under this heading; and others, again, in Gaul. Similarly
in Germany, attempts have been made by Koenen and other writers to
classify the plain pottery whether according to form or on other
principles (see above, p. 536).

Many years ago a rough but in some respects convenient classification
was made by Brongniart[3618] on the basis of the colour of the clay
employed, which he distinguished under four heads: (1) pale yellow or
white wares; (2) red wares, varying to reddish-brown; (3) grey or
ash-coloured wares; (4) black wares. In the first division he included
the large, often coarse, vases, such as the _dolia_ and _amphorae_;
under the second head Roman ware of the first century, and under the
third that of subsequent date; while the fourth class comprised
Gallo-Roman and other provincial wares. A somewhat similar system, in
some respects even less chronological, was attempted by Buckman,[3619]
who distinguished brown ware as a separate fabric. The obvious defect
of these systems is that they are neither chronological nor according
to fabrics, and that their basis is in many respects a purely
accidental one; but at the same time they have proved convenient for
discussing plain ware which does not admit of much consideration apart
from its forms and the general appearance of its composition. And at
all events they enable us to discuss examples of certain shapes under
one head, inasmuch as the _amphorae_ and _dolia_ are nearly all of the
first class, the _mortaria_ or _pelves_ of the third, cups, dishes, and
flasks of the second and fourth, and so on.

The yellow ware[3620] is distinguished by its coarse clay, of a
greyish-white or yellow colour, varying to dirty white, grey, or red.
It is to this division that all the larger vases belong, such as those
used for storing wine and other commodities or for funerary purposes,
and the innumerable fragments of _dolia_ and _amphorae_ which compose
the Monte Testaccio at Rome.[3621] Some of these vases were made on the
wheel, but others were modelled by hand and turned from within. Those
used in burial were usually of a globular form, or even _dolia_ with
the necks and handles broken off, and contained cinerary urns and glass
vessels. We also find _lagenae_, _trullae_ (saucepans), and _mortaria_
made in this ware. Another remarkable variety may be described as a
kind of _olla_; its peculiarity is that it is modelled in the form of a
human head, much in the same style as the primitive vases of Troy (Vol.
I. p. 258). A vase of this type found at Bootham, near Lincoln, had
painted on the foot D(_e_)O MIIRCVRIO, “To the god Mercury,“ in brown
letters.[3622] The clay is light yellow, with a slip of the same colour.

A finer variety of this clay, often of a rosy tint, or white and
micaceous, was used for making the smaller vases, which are thin and
light, and all turned on the wheel.[3623] They are sometimes ornamented
with bands, lines, hatching, or leaves, slightly indicated in dull
ochre, laid on and fired with the vase. Some specimens are covered with
a flat white slip, of a more uniform character than that employed on
the Athenian vases. In others the clay is largely mixed with grains of
quartz. In Britain little jars of a very white clay have sometimes been
found, as well as small bottles and dishes, painted inside with
patterns in a dull red or brown. They seem to have formed a kind of
finer ware for ornamental purposes, as well as for the table.

The second class, that of the red wares, forms by far the largest
division of Roman plain pottery, and comprises most of the kinds used
for domestic purposes; it is found in all forms and sizes, all over
Europe, often covered with a coating or slip, white, black, or red.
This class may be considered to include all varieties of red and
reddish-brown ware, but as a rule the clay varies in colour from pale
rose to deep coral, and in quality from a coarse gritty composition to
a fine compact and homogeneous paste. It is usually without a glaze,
and sometimes the clay is largely micaceous. To enumerate all the
shapes which illustrate this ware is unnecessary, but the
Romano-British and Morel Collections in the British Museum—and in fact
any representative collection of Roman pottery—exhibit all the
principal varieties, from the cinerary urn to the so-called
“tear-bottle” or unguent vase. The principal shapes are also
illustrated in the treatises of Hölder and Koenen.

Among sepulchral vases of this ware were the _ollae_ in which the ashes
of slaves were placed in the _columbaria_ at Rome, tall jars with
moulded rims and flat saucer-shaped covers.[3624] In Roman tombs in
Gaul and Britain these _ollae_ are usually placed inside large _dolia_
or amphorae, to protect them from the weight of the superincumbent
earth.[3625] In Britain they have been found at Lincoln, on the sites
of Roman settlements along the Dover Road, at Colchester, and in other
places, and as many as twenty thousand are recorded as having been
found at Bordeaux.[3626] After the introduction of Christianity this
practice seems to have been abandoned, but vases of smaller size
continued to be placed round the bones of the dead.

The grey wares were usually made of fine clay, of which there were two
varieties: a sandy loam like that of which bricks are made on the
borders of the chalk formations in England, and a heavy stone-coloured
paste, sonorous when struck, which has been compared to the clay of
modern Staffordshire ware. The colour of the first-named is light and
its texture brittle, and it was chiefly used for _mortaria_, or for
cooking-vessels which were exposed to the heat of the fire. The
_mortaria_ resemble modern milk-pans, being flat, with overlapping
edges and a grooved spout opening in front. They appear to have been
used both for cooking, many bearing traces of the action of fire, and
for grinding food or other commodities, the latter purpose probably
explaining the presence, in the interior of many examples, of small
pebbles, or a hard coating of pounded tile, to counteract the effects
of trituration. They are usually of a hard coarse texture, but compact
and heavy, and their colour varies from pale red to bright yellow or
creamy white.

[Illustration: FIG. 230. ROMAN MORTARIUM FROM RIBCHESTER (BRITISH
MUSEUM).]

They are frequently stamped with the name of the potter, placed in a
square or rectangular panel on the rim and often arranged in two lines.
The names are either single, denoting the work of slaves, as Albinus,
Brixsa, Catulus, Sollus, and Marinus, or double and occasionally even
triple, for the work of freedmen, as Q. Valerius, Sex. Valerius, Q.
Averus Veranius, and so on.[3627] The example given in Fig. 230 is from
Ribchester in Lancashire, and bears the stamp BORIED(_us_) F(_ecit_). A
_mortarium_ recently dug up in Bow Lane, London, now in the Guildhall
Museum, has the name of Averus Veranius with O · GARR · FAC in smaller
type between the words, apparently referring to the place of
manufacture.[3628] One of the commonest names is that of Ripanus
Tiberinus, who gives the name of the place where he worked: RIPANVS ·
TIBER · F · | LVGVDV FACT, _Ripanus Tiber(inus) f(ecit); Lugudu(ni)
fact(um)_.[3629] The potters’ names are usually accompanied by the
letters OF or F. The mortaria vary from seven to twenty-three inches in
diameter, and are found in England, France, Germany, and Switzerland.
Of the second or heavier variety a curious vase in the form of a human
head was found at Castor[3630]; much of the New Forest ware also comes
under the same heading,[3631] including the small cups with pinched-in
sides, some being covered with a slip of micaceous consistency.

Of black ware many varieties have been found in Gaul and Britain,
besides the special local wares which have already been described. Some
were employed as funerary urns, but the majority are of small size, and
in quality they vary from the extremest coarseness to a fine polished
clay, producing an effect almost equal to the Greek or Etruscan black
wares. The finest specimens of plain black ware are to be seen in the
vases with a highly polished surface, presenting a metallic appearance
and an olive hue which almost approximates to that of bronze. Examples
of this ware are found in Gaul at Lezoux, in Britain at Castor, and
elsewhere.[3632]

In the first century after Christ a superior kind of black ware seems
to have been made in Northern Gaul and Germany, described by
Dragendorff as “Belgic black ware.”[3633] The clay is bluish-grey, with
black polished surface produced like that of the bucchero ware by
smoke, not like the black glaze of later Roman ware. A similar variety
of grey ware exists, but without glaze or polish. The forms of the
vases vary very much from the Roman, including a typical high, slim urn
and other more squat forms, closely imitating metal; they bear some
relation to those of the La Tène period, and are Celtic or Gaulish
rather than German.[3634] Such ornamentation as they bear is
exclusively linear, and never in relief. There is, however, a Roman
form of plate which often occurs, and, generally speaking, the fabric
may be described as a continuation of pre-Roman pottery influenced by
Italy. It is well represented at Xanten and Andernach, but is not found
on the Limes, and is rare in Britain; it does not seem to have been
made after the beginning of the Flavian epoch, when it was largely
superseded by the ordinary Roman black glazed wares.

A special kind of black ware seems to have been made in the valley of
the Rhone, consisting of pots of a coarse, gritty paste with micaceous
particles, breaking with a coarse fracture of a dark red colour. They
have been mostly found at Vienne, where they seem to have been made.
The bottom of the vase is usually impressed with a circular stamp with
the potter’s name in late letters, as L · CASSI · O, F(_ir_)MINVS · F,
SEVVO · F, SIMILIS · F (from Aix).[3635] The well-known name of Fortis
has also been found on black ware from Aix.

In Britain black ware is, as elsewhere, exceedingly common, and a
typical group of the smaller varieties is afforded by a series of five
found in a sarcophagus at Binsted in Hampshire, now in the British
Museum,[3636] consisting of two _calices_, a jar (_olla_), an
_acetabulum_, and a kind of candlestick. The Upchurch ware largely
belongs to this category, and much of the same kind has been found at
Weymouth.

Brown ware of a very coarse style is often found with other Roman
remains, consisting of amphorae and other vessels for domestic use.
Examples of amphorae and jugs with female heads modelled on the necks
have been found at Richborough and elsewhere.[3637]

At Wroxeter the excavations yielded two new classes of pottery, one
consisting of narrow-necked jugs and _mortaria_,[3638] very beautifully
made from a white local clay, which has been identified with that found
at Broseley in the neighbourhood, nowadays supplying material for the
manufacture of tobacco-pipes. The surface is decorated with red and
yellow stripes. The other kind is a variety of red ware which has been
styled “Romano-Salopian,” made from clay obtained in the Severn valley,
and differing from the common Roman ware.[3639] It is, however,
exceedingly doubtful whether these types should be classed under the
heading Roman.

In conclusion, it may be noted that although all provincial museums
contain more or less complete collections of the ordinary plain
fabrics, they are for the most part of strictly local origin, and not
in themselves sufficient for general study. But since the acquisition
of the Morel Collection by the British Museum the student has ample
facilities for investigating there not only the fabrics of Britain, but
also those of Gaul, of which an exhaustive series is now incorporated
in our national collection.

                  *       *       *       *       *

With this review of the ceramic industries of the Roman Empire, we
conclude our survey of the pottery of the classical world. We have
followed its rise from the rough, almost shapeless products of the
Neolithic and earliest Bronze Age, when the potter’s wheel was as yet
unknown (on classical soil), and decoration was not attempted, or was
confined to the rudest kinds of incised patterns. We have traced the
development of painted decoration from monochrome to polychrome, from
simple patterns to elaborate pictorial compositions, and so to its
gradual decay and disappearance under the luxurious and artificial
tendencies of the Hellenistic Age, when men were ever seeking for new
artistic departures, and a new system of technique arose which finally
substituted various forms of decoration in relief for painting. And
lastly, we have seen how this new system established itself firmly in
the domain of Roman art, until with the gradual decay of artistic taste
and under the encroachments of barbarism, it sank into neglect and
oblivion. We observe, too, with a melancholy interest, that while other
arts, such as architecture, painting, and metal-work, have left some
sort of heritage to the later European civilisations, and like the
runners in the Greek torch-race

                         vitai lampada tradunt,

this is not so in the case of pottery. This art had, it would seem,
completely worn itself out, and had, in fact, returned to the level of
its earliest beginnings. The decorative element disappears, and pottery
becomes, as in its earliest days, a mere utilitarian industry, the
secrets of its former technical achievements irrevocably lost, its
ornamentation reduced to the simplest and roughest kinds of decoration,
and its status among the products of human industry once more limited
to the mere supplying of one of the humblest of men’s needs.

But this was inevitable, and we must perforce be content; for have we
not seen, in the course of its rise and fall, a reflection of the whole
history of Greek art, from the humble beginnings in which Pausanias
descried the touch of something divine which presaged its future
greatness? It is unnecessary to recapitulate the manner in which the
successive stages of Greek art are mirrored in the pottery, from the
first efforts of the Athenian potter down to the eclecticism of the
Arretine ware. Let it suffice to say that the object of this work has
been twofold: firstly, to show the many-sided interests of the
historical study of ancient pottery; secondly, to point out its value
to the student of ancient art and mythology: and that it is the modest
hope of the writer that this object has been in some measure fulfilled.

-----

Footnote 3421:

  See a correspondence in the _Gentleman’s Magazine_, 1844-45,
  reprinted in the _Gentleman’s Magazine Library, Romano-British
  Remains_, ii. p. 547 ff.

Footnote 3422:

  _Bonner Jahrbücher_, xcvi. p. 82.

Footnote 3423:

  _Ergebnisse von Olympia_, iv. p. 206: cf. _ibid._ v. p. 783.

Footnote 3424:

  _Cyprus Mus. Cat._ p. 93, and index, _s.v._ Samian.

Footnote 3425:

  M. Déchelette’s epoch-making work on Roman pottery in Gaul only
  appeared after this chapter was in type. To make proper use of it
  would have necessitated practically re-writing the chapter; but I
  have remodelled it where absolutely essential, and given frequent
  references to his work in foot-notes, which it is hoped may suffice
  in some measure. Moreover for some of the fabrics I have had the
  advantage of his articles previously published in the _Revue
  Archéol._ xxxviii. (1901) and the _Revue des Études Anciens_, v.
  (1903), which he has since incorporated in his book.

Footnote 3426:

  _Terra Sigillata_, in _Bonner Jahrbücher_, xcvi. (1895), p. 18 ff.

Footnote 3427:

  See _Bonner Jahrb._ lxxxvi. p. 152 ff.; Koenen, _Gefässkunde_, p. 88.

Footnote 3428:

  _C.I.L._ x. 8055, 4-9; 8056, 5, 46-52, 280 ff.; _ibid._ v. 8115, 97.

Footnote 3429:

  See Déchelette, i. p. 16; _Bonner Jahrb._ ci. p. 22.

Footnote 3430:

  Cf. Dragendorff’s Nos. 15-17 (plates 1-2) with Nos. 1-3 (plate 1).

Footnote 3431:

  For examples from Andernach, see _Bonner Jahrb._ lxxxvi. pl. 6, 16,
  pl. 7, 18.

Footnote 3432:

  See Déchelette, i. p. 66, and below, p. 520.

Footnote 3433:

  _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p. 86.

Footnote 3434:

  It was deserted about 5 B.C. See Déchelette, i. p. 93.

Footnote 3435:

  _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p. 87 ff.

Footnote 3436:

  _Festschr. für Joh. Overbeck_, p. 168; cf. _Bonner Jahrb._ lxxxvi. p.
  155.

Footnote 3437:

  _Bonner Jahrb._ lxxxvi. pl. 5, 21, pl. 6, 4, 9-10: cf. Dragendorff’s
  Nos. 19-20.

Footnote 3438:

  _Op. cit._ xcvi. p. 87.

Footnote 3439:

  For other typical stamps see Dragendorff in _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p.
  95; _ibid._ lxxxvi. p. 164 ff., lxxxix. p. 51 ff.

Footnote 3440:

  _C.I.L._ vii. 1336, 790 is an isolated example of the black ware
  found in London.

Footnote 3441:

  _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p. 103 ff.; Déchelette, i. p. 64 ff.

Footnote 3442:

  _Ill. Rom. Lond._ p. 98.

Footnote 3443:

  _Collect. Antiq._ vi. p. 70; _Ill. Rom. Lond._ _loc. cit._

Footnote 3444:

  See _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p. 105.

Footnote 3445:

  See _ibid._ p. 110, pls. 2-3, figs. 31-55, for later provincial forms.

Footnote 3446:

  See his vol. i. p. 29, with plates 2-5.

Footnote 3447:

  _Ibid._ ii. pls. 1, 2.

Footnote 3448:

  See _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p. 126 ff.

Footnote 3449:

  Cf. the vases given in Plate LXVII. figs. 1, 2, and Déchelette, i.
  pp. 70, 180, pl. 6.

Footnote 3450:

  See below, p. 520

Footnote 3451:

  See generally Déchelette, i. p. 219.

Footnote 3452:

  _Ibid._ ii. p. 91 ff.

Footnote 3453:

  An exhaustive list of types, figures, and ornaments of all kinds, as
  found in the Graufesenque and Lezoux fabrics, is given by Déchelette
  in his second volume, p. 5 ff.

Footnote 3454:

  See Roach-Smith, _Ill. Rom. Lond._ p. 95.

Footnote 3455:

  See also the useful list given by Von Hefner in _Oberbayr. Archiv_,
  xxii. (1863), p. 28 ff., giving the chief types on German wares from
  Westerndorf and elsewhere.

Footnote 3456:

  See _Cat. of London Antiqs._ Nos. 158 ff. pl. 8; _Ill. Rom. Lond._ p.
  89 ff.; _Collect. Antiq._ _passim_; also Plate LXVIII.

Footnote 3457:

  _Collect. Antiq._ ii. p. 13.

Footnote 3458:

  Cf. _C.I.L._ xiii. 10010, 1682.

Footnote 3459:

  Hence Roach-Smith was inclined to date the vase as late as the fifth
  century; but recent researches show that this is impossible. Even in
  the first century vases of this debased style are found. There were
  two potters of the name of Sabinus in the first century in Gaul
  (Déchelette, i. p. 297).

Footnote 3460:

  _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p. 139: cf. Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ ii.
  p. 15.

Footnote 3461:

  See _C.I.L._ xiii. part 3, p. 121.

Footnote 3462:

  _Ibid._ p. 120. An example from Britain is L. Cosconius Virilis
  (_C.I.L._ vii. 1336, 346: cf. Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ i. p.
  155).

Footnote 3463:

  _C.I.L._ xiii. 10006, 95, on a _mortarium_.

Footnote 3464:

  _C.I.L._ xiii. 10010, 1670.

Footnote 3465:

  _C.I.L._ vii. 1314: cf. _Rev. Arch._ xxiv. (1894), p. 57.

Footnote 3466:

  Déchelette, i. p. 86, pl. 13; _Rev. Arch._ iii. (1904), p. 75 ff. The
  names of vessels include the interesting word _pannae_, whence our
  “pan.”

Footnote 3467:

  See _Oberbayr. Archiv für vaterl. Gesch._ xxii. (1863), p. 38, pl. 4,
  fig. 1; _C.I.L._ iii. 6010, 68; Déchelette, i. p. 210.

Footnote 3468:

  _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p. 136.

Footnote 3469:

  _Oberbayr. Archiv_, xxii. (1863), p. 43.

Footnote 3470:

  _C.I.L._ vii. 1337, 22.

Footnote 3471:

  Orelli, 4189; Blanchet in _Bullet. Archéol._ 1898, p. 29, and _id._,
  _Mélanges Gallo-romaines_, ii. (1902), p. 109.

Footnote 3472:

  See Marquardt, _Privatleben der Römer_, p. 648, note 7.

Footnote 3473:

  Henzen, 7258; Blanchet, _loc. cit._: cf. _C.I.L._ iii. 5833.

Footnote 3474:

  Steiner, _Cod. Inscr. Danub. et Rheni_, ii. p. 305; Orelli, 2029.

Footnote 3475:

  Orelli, 4302; Henzen, 7259; Blanchet, _loc. cit._

Footnote 3476:

  Steiner, _op. cit._ i. p. 58, No. 130. Other names of consuls from
  199 to 228 are given in _Bonner Jahrb._ xv. p. 61 (these are in
  _graffito_).

Footnote 3477:

  Steiner, ii. p. 349 ff., Nos. 1649-51, 1653, 1661; _Bonner Jahrb._
  xv. p. 53 ff.

Footnote 3478:

  _Gaz. Arch._ 1877, p. 180; Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ iii. pl.
  31, p. 193.

Footnote 3479:

  _Journ. Brit. Arch. Assoc_, iv. p. 364.

Footnote 3480:

  _C.I.L._ vii. 1335, 4.

Footnote 3481:

  For the technique of this process see above, p. 442, and Brongniart,
  _Traité_, i. p. 425.

Footnote 3482:

  There is an example of this ware from Cologne in the British Museum
  (Greek and Roman Department), and others at Turin and Trier.
  Déchelette (ii. p. 309) states that it is found in the first century
  B.C.

Footnote 3483:

  See _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p. 111 ff.; Hölder, _Formen der röm.
  Thongef._ p. 8.

Footnote 3484:

  Déchelette, ii. p. 309.

Footnote 3485:

  Koenen, _Gefässkunde_, p. 101.

Footnote 3486:

  _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p. 120.

Footnote 3487:

  _Op. cit._ p. 121: cf. _Mus. Borb._ v. 13.

Footnote 3488:

  See for examples Déchelette, ii. pl. 5; _Bonner Jahrb_. lxxxiv. pl.
  2, figs. 2-5, p. 109; Roach-Smith, _Ill. Rom. Lond._ p. 93;
  _Oberbayr. Archiv._, 1863, pl. 4, fig. 11; and Plate LXIX. fig. 4.

Footnote 3489:

  Vol. ii. p. 325.

Footnote 3490:

  i. p. 41 ff.

Footnote 3491:

  i. p. 64 ff.

Footnote 3492:

  i. p. 138 ff.

Footnote 3493:

  _C.I.L._ xiii. 10009, 3; Déchelette, i. p. 31 ff.

Footnote 3494:

  _C.I.L._ iii. Suppl. 12013, 3; Déchelette, i. p. 34.

Footnote 3495:

  Déchelette, i. p. 60.

Footnote 3496:

  See also Jullian in _Revue des Études Anciens_, i. (1899), p. 152.

Footnote 3497:

  Painted vases with Geometrical decoration were widely exported, even
  to Bohemia: see _Rev. Arch._ xxvi. (1895), pls. 5, 6, p. 196 ff.;
  _Gaz. Arch._ 1881-2, pls. 3-4, p. 17.

Footnote 3498:

  See Déchelette, i. p. 66; it is the form numbered 11 by Dragendorff.

Footnote 3499:

  _Op. cit._ i. p. 68: cf. _C.I.L._ xi. 6700, 821.

Footnote 3500:

  See Déchelette, i. pls. 6, 7, p. 69.

Footnote 3501:

  _Op. cit._ i. pl. 8, p. 74.

Footnote 3502:

  See also _op. cit._ pl. 9, p. 73.

Footnote 3503:

  See his vol. i. p. 75 for further details.

Footnote 3504:

  A figure of Artemis is derived from the type given by Hauser,
  _Neuattische Reliefs_, pl. 1, fig. 9: for a _genre_ type, cf. the
  fishermen figured by Déchelette, _Rev. des Études Anciens_, v. p. 55
  (= _Vases de la Gaule_, ii. p. 91, type No. 556).

Footnote 3505:

  The list of names given by Déchelette, i. p. 81, will render it
  possible to trace Rutenian potters on these sites in _C.I.L._ xiii.
  part 3, fasc. 1: see also vols. vii. (Britain), x. (Campania), xv.
  (Rome), etc., and Déchelette, i. p. 105 ff.

Footnote 3506:

  Examples in British and Guildhall Museums.

Footnote 3507:

  _Op. cit._ i. p. 112.

Footnote 3508:

  Cf. _C.I.L._ xv. 5059, 5273, 5355; 4945.

Footnote 3509:

  _C.I.L._ x. 8055, 27: cf. Déchelette, i. p. 96 ff.

Footnote 3510:

  _C.I.L._ ii. 4970, 559 from Tarraco, and the vase published in _Rev.
  Arch._ xxxiii. (1898), p. 100, fig. 11, from Carthage.

Footnote 3511:

  Vol. i. p. 113.

Footnote 3512:

  _Op. cit._ i. p. 79.

Footnote 3513:

  _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p. 97 (“Marmorirung”): see also Déchelette, i.
  p. 67.

Footnote 3514:

  _C.I.L._ x. 8056, 283.

Footnote 3515:

  See _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p. 101; _Gaz. Arch._ 1877, pl. 28, p. 172
  ff.; Déchelette, i. p. 120 ff.

Footnote 3516:

  _Mus. Borb._ vii. pl. 29; _C.I.L._ x. 8056, 4; Déchelette, i. p. 121.

Footnote 3517:

  Déchelette (i. p. 125) notes in these names a direct proof of
  exportation; they were carried about by the _negotiatores_ or agents
  (p. 511) to the different regions named.

Footnote 3518:

  _Étude de la Céramique Arverno-romaine_ (1887). M. Déchelette has
  embodied most of Plicque’s researches in his own account of the
  potteries (i. p. 138 ff.).

Footnote 3519:

  See Déchelette, i. pp. 155, 194 ff. for lists of names, with types
  used by each and places where found.

Footnote 3520:

  See Déchelette, i. pls. 4, 5, Nos. 63-71, and p. 149.

Footnote 3521:

  _Op. cit._ p. 178 ff.

Footnote 3522:

  See Plicque’s summary in his _Étude de la Céramique Arverno-rom_. p.
  10 ff.

Footnote 3523:

  See generally Déchelette, ii. p. 167 ff.; also _Rev. Arch._ ii.
  (1903), pl. 17, p. 387.

Footnote 3524:

  Cf. the Greek _stamnos_ (Vol. I. p. 164).

Footnote 3525:

  _Ill. Rom. Lond._ pp. 86, 97, pl. 29; _Cat. of London Antiqs._ pl. 7,
  fig. 2; _Richborough_, p. 74.

Footnote 3526:

  Déchelette, ii. p. 316.

Footnote 3527:

  Déchelette, ii. p. 321.

Footnote 3528:

  On the technical aspect of these, see above, p. 441; for all other
  information reference should be made to Déchelette, ii. p. 235 ff.

Footnote 3529:

  Froehner, _Coll. Gréau_, No. 1353.

Footnote 3530:

  Déchelette states that seventy-nine have been found at Vienne,
  thirty-three at Lyons, and twenty-nine at Orange.

Footnote 3531:

  _Musées de France_, pls. 14-16, p. 52 ff.

Footnote 3532:

  _Gaz. Arch._ 1877, pl. 12, p. 66. The second of these has passed into
  the British Museum (in the Morel Collection). See Fig. 227, and
  Déchelette, ii. p. 290.

Footnote 3533:

  Stephani, _Vasens._ 1353; _id._, _Compte-Rendu_, 1873, p. 67.

Footnote 3534:

  _Recueil_, vi. 107: see Déchelette, ii. pp. 236, 250, 253, 294.

Footnote 3535:

  _Gaz. Arch._ 1889, p. 50, pl. 15.

Footnote 3536:

  See also _Gaz. Arch._ 1880, pl. 30, p. 178 for examples from Nismes;
  Froehner, _Coll. Gréau_, 1351, 1352; _Rev. Arch._ xix. (1892), pl.
  11, p. 313; Daremberg and Saglio, iii. _art._ Forma, figs. 3184,
  3185; _C.I.L._ xii. 5687. All previous literature is now superseded
  by Déchelette’s work (vol. ii. p. 235 ff.).

Footnote 3537:

  _Op. cit._ i. p. 27.

Footnote 3538:

  _Ibid._ p. 204.

Footnote 3539:

  _Ibid._ The form employed is his No. 69.

Footnote 3540:

  See Hettner in _Festschrift für J. Overbeck_, p. 165 ff.; Koenen in
  _Bonner Jahrb._ lxxxvi. p. 152 ff.

Footnote 3541:

  See Fiedler, _Castra Vetera_, p. 40; _Bonner Jahrb._ v. p. 422, pls.
  13-4; and for stamps, Steiner, _Cod. Inscr. Danub. et Rheni_, ii. p.
  225, No. 1317.

Footnote 3542:

  _Oberbayr. Archiv für vaterländische Geschichte_, xxii. (1863), p. 1
  ff.

Footnote 3543:

  A useful summary is given by Von Hefner, p. 28.

Footnote 3544:

  Cf. _ibid._ pl. 4, figs. 1-7.

Footnote 3545:

  _Ibid._ p. 42.

Footnote 3546:

  See Roach-Smith, _Ill. Rom. Lond._ p. 99; Déchelette, i. p. 210.

Footnote 3547:

  In the Greek and Roman Department, found at Mainz.

Footnote 3548:

  Déchelette, ii. p. 319.

Footnote 3549:

  _Archaeologia_, lvii. p. 104.

Footnote 3550:

  _Victoria County Hist. of Northants_, p. 211.

Footnote 3551:

  _Gefässkunde in den Rheinlanden_, p. 65 ff. For various finds of
  pottery in Germany see also _Bonner Jahrb._ lxxiv. p. 147; lxxxiv. p.
  108 ff.; lxxxix. p. 1 ff.

Footnote 3552:

  See _Rev. Arch._ xxxix. (1901), p. 51 ff.

Footnote 3553:

  See also generally Von Hefner, _op. cit._; _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p.
  87 ff., and index to vols. 1-60; Wolff in _Westdeutsche Zeitschr. für
  Gesch. u. Kunst_, xviii. (1899), p. 213.

Footnote 3554:

  _Formen der röm. Thongefässe_, p. 11.

Footnote 3555:

  _Bonner Jahrb._ xiii. p. 106 ff., xxxv. p. 46, lxxxvii. p. 61 ff.,
  xcvi. p. 101; Déchelette, ii. p. 311, p. 312, note 3.

Footnote 3556:

  Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ i. pl. 4, p. 3.

Footnote 3557:

  _Bonner Jahrb._ xiii. p. 112; lxxxvii. p. 62; Steiner, _Cod. Inscr.
  Danub. et Rhen._ ii. p. 195, No. 1252 (from Neuss): cf. Virg. _Ecl._
  iii. 47.

Footnote 3558:

  Steiner, _op. cit._ p. 100; Gerhard, _Berlins ant. Bildw._ No. 1687;
  Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ i. pl. 4, p. 3; _Bonner Jahrb._
  lxxxvii. p. 63.

Footnote 3559:

  _Bonner Jahrb._ xiii. p. 113.

Footnote 3560:

  _Ibid._ xiii. pp. 109, 113, lxxxvii. p. 64; Steiner, _op. cit._ p.
  155; and in B.M. (BIBE).

Footnote 3561:

  _Bonner Jahrb._ xiii. pp. 107, 108, xxxv. p. 47, lxxxvii. p. 65; B.M.
  (Fig. 229).

Footnote 3562:

  _Op. cit._ xxxv. p. 49.

Footnote 3563:

  _Op. cit._ xxxv. p. 48, lxxxvii. p. 66.

Footnote 3564:

  _Op. cit._ xiii. p. 113.

Footnote 3565:

  _Op. cit._ xiii. p. 111, lxxxvii. p. 66; B.M.

Footnote 3566:

  _Op. cit._ xxxv. p. 49.

Footnote 3567:

  _Op. cit._ xiii. p. 111, lxxxvii. p. 67.

Footnote 3568:

  _Op. cit._ lxxxvii. p. 67; _Collect. Antiq._ i. p. 3.

Footnote 3569:

  Levezow, _Berliner Verzeichniss,_ p. 366, No. 1470; _Bonner Jahrb._
  lxxxvii. p. 68

Footnote 3570:

  _Bonner Jahrb._ xiii. p. 107, lxxxvii. p. 69.

Footnote 3571:

  _Ibid._

Footnote 3572:

  _Op. cit._ xxxv. p. 49, lxxxvii. p. 70.

Footnote 3573:

  _Op. cit._ xiii. p. 106, xxxv. p. 48, lxxxvii. p. 78: cf. B.M. (REPLE
  COPO DA).

Footnote 3574:

  _Op. cit._ xxxv. p. 48, lxxxvii. p. 77.

Footnote 3575:

  _Op. cit._ xiii. p. 106, xxxv. p. 47, lxxxvii. p. 71; Levezow, _op.
  cit._ No. 1469.

Footnote 3576:

  _Op. cit._ xiii. p. 110; Levezow, No. 1471.

Footnote 3577:

  _Op. cit._ xiii. p. 107, xxxv. p. 49, lxxxvii. p. 72.

Footnote 3578:

  _Op. cit._ lxxxvii. p. 72; B.M.

Footnote 3579:

  _Op. cit._ xiii. p. 110, xxxv. p. 48, lxxxvii. p. 73; B.M. (VIVAS).

Footnote 3580:

  _Zeitschr. des Vereins zur Erforsch. d. rhein. Gesch. u. Altert._ iv.
  (1900), p. 266.

Footnote 3581:

  For stamps found here and at Voorburg, see Steiner, _Cod. Inscr.
  Danub. et Rhen._ ii. p. 276, No. 1449, p. 293, No. 1484.

Footnote 3582:

  _Bonner Jahrb._ xlvi. p. 115; Déchelette, i. p. 103. They are now in
  the Leiden Museum.

Footnote 3583:

  See _C.I.L._ ii. 4970, and p. 512; Brongniart, _Traité_, i. p. 453;
  Déchelette, i. p. 16; and above, pp. 479, 499.

Footnote 3584:

  See above, p. 536.

Footnote 3585:

  See Haverfield in _Cumberland and Westm. Arch. Soc. Trans._ xv. p.
  191.

Footnote 3586:

  _Ill. Rom. Lond._ pls. 24-8, p. 89 ff.; _Richborough_, pl. 3.

Footnote 3587:

  Wellbeloved, _Eburacum_, pl. 16; Scarth, _Aquae Solis_, pl. 43; Lee,
  _Isca Silurum_, pls. II, 12.

Footnote 3588:

  _Vict. County Hist. of Warwickshire_, i. p. 230.

Footnote 3589:

  _Arch. Aeliana_, x. p. 268; _Proc. Soc. Ant. Scot._ xxx. (1896), p.
  179 ff.; Haverfield, _loc. cit._

Footnote 3590:

  Haverfield’s fig. 8 (_loc. cit._).

Footnote 3591:

  Haverfield, _op. cit._, pl. 7, fig. 7, p. 193; and see p. 528 above.

Footnote 3592:

  Cf. Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ ii. p. 35, and see above, p. 502.

Footnote 3593:

  Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ iv. pl. 17, p. 63; _Victoria County
  Hist. of Northants_, p. 219.

Footnote 3594:

  See Déchelette, i. p. 282, ii. p. 71, No. 425.

Footnote 3595:

  Artis, _Durobrivae_, pl. 30, figs. 1, 4.

Footnote 3596:

  _Handbook to British Pottery in Mus. of Pract. Geol._ 1893, p. 72.

Footnote 3597:

  vii. 1334-36. Supplementary lists are given in _Arch. Journal_, xxxv.
  p. 289.

Footnote 3598:

  See _C.I.L._ vii. p. 238 for bibliography.

Footnote 3599:

  _Ill. Rom. Lond._ pp. 102, 107.

Footnote 3600:

  General reference may also be made to the archaeological journals of
  the London and provincial societies, and to the volume of the
  _Gentleman’s Magazine Library_ on _Romano-British Remains_; also for
  Norfolk, Northants, Hampshire, and other counties, to the respective
  volumes of the _Victoria County History_.

Footnote 3601:

  Cumberland and Westmoreland, Hereford, Hertford, Kent, and Lancashire.

Footnote 3602:

  See Haverfield, in _Vict. County Hist. of Northants_, p. 208, fig. 29.

Footnote 3603:

  Cf. Haverfield, figs. 32, 33.

Footnote 3604:

  _Ibid._ fig. 33.

Footnote 3605:

  _Ibid._ p. 209.

Footnote 3606:

  Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ iv. pl. 21, p. 82; _Vict. County Hist.
  of Northants_, p. 211; _C.I.L._ vii. 1335, 3.

Footnote 3607:

  But see above, p. 536, and Déchelette, ii. p. 311.

Footnote 3608:

  _Arch. Journ._ liv. p. 349.

Footnote 3609:

  Artis, _Durobrivae_, pl. 28; _Vict. County Hist. of Northants_, p.
  211, fig. 34: cf. _ibid._ p. 190 = fig. 18, p. 192 (from Bedford
  Purlieus).

Footnote 3610:

  _Collect. Antiq._ iv. pl. 24.

Footnote 3611:

  _Ibid._ iv. p. 91: cf. the vase mentioned on p. 539.

Footnote 3612:

  _Brit. Arch. Assoc. Journ._ i. p. 5 ff.

Footnote 3613:

  Haverfield, in _Vict. County Hist. of Northants_, p. 212.

Footnote 3614:

  _Arch. Journ._, xiii. p. 173: cf. _C.I.L._ vii. 1336, 220.

Footnote 3615:

  See on this ware Roach-Smith, _Collect. Antiq._ vi. p. 178, pl. 36,
  and _Ill. Rom. Lond._ p. 82; Wright, _Uriconium_, p. 247 ff., and
  _Celt, Roman, and Saxon_^4, p. 260.

Footnote 3616:

  Haverfield, in _Vict. County Hist. of Hants_, i. p. 326.

Footnote 3617:

  _Archaeologia_, xxxv. p. 91; _Arch. Journ._ liv. p. 348; x. p. 8;
  xxx. p. 319; _Proc. Soc. Antiq._ 1st Ser. ii. p. 285, iv. p. 167.

Footnote 3618:

  _Traité_, i. p. 381.

Footnote 3619:

  _Roman Art in Cirencester_, p. 77.

Footnote 3620:

  See Blümner, _Technol._ ii. p. 65.

Footnote 3621:

  _C.I.L._ xv. p. 560; _Ann. dell’ Inst._ 1878, p. 119 ff.

Footnote 3622:

  _Proc. Soc. Ant._ 2nd Ser. iii. (1867), p. 440 (now in B.M.): cf.
  Artis, _Durobrivae_, pl. 49.

Footnote 3623:

  Brongniart, i. p. 435.

Footnote 3624:

  See Daremberg and Saglio, _s.v._ Olla.

Footnote 3625:

  Cf. Wright, _Celt, Roman, and Saxon_^4, p. 359 ff.; _Archaeologia_,
  xii. pl. 14, p. 108; _Brit. Arch. Assoc. Journ._ i. p. 239; and see
  above, p. 457.

Footnote 3626:

  Brongniart, i. p. 437.

Footnote 3627:

  See generally _C.I.L._ vii. 1334.

Footnote 3628:

  _Journ. Brit. Arch. Assoc._ xlvi. (1890), p. 156; other examples at
  Colchester and Exeter and Guildhall (_Cat._ p. 104, No. 641, Q · ERIV
  · GERMANVS): see also _C.I.L._ vii. 1334, 63.

Footnote 3629:

  Roach-Smith, _Ill. Rom. Lond._ p. 89; _C.I.L._ vii. 1334, 43.

Footnote 3630:

  Artis, _Durobrivae_, pl. 49, fig. 1.

Footnote 3631:

  See _Vict. Hist. of Hants_, i. p. 326.

Footnote 3632:

  Cf. Plicque, _Céramique Arverno-romaine_, pp. 16, 30.

Footnote 3633:

  _Bonner Jahrb._ xcvi. p. 88.

Footnote 3634:

  _Ibid._ p. 89; Hettner in _Festschr. für Joh. Overbeck_, p. 170.

Footnote 3635:

  _C.I.L._ xii. 5685, 195, 362, 831, 845; _B. M. Cat. of Terracottas_,
  E 145-47 (wrongly included in that volume among tile-stamps).

Footnote 3636:

  _Arch. Journ._ ix. p. 12.

Footnote 3637:

  Roach-Smith, _Richborough_, p. 74; Wright, _Celt, Roman, and
  Saxon^4_, p. 281; others in B.M.

Footnote 3638:

  Wright, _Uriconium_, p. 251. Examples may be seen in the Shrewsbury
  Museum.

Footnote 3639:

  Wright, _ibid._ p. 252, and _Celt, Roman, and Saxon^4_, p. 278.




                                 INDEX


 NOTE.—_Names of artists and ?a???-names not included in this list will
            be found in those given in Vol. II. p. 273 ff._



Abaskantos, lamp-maker, i. 108

_Abecedaria_, ii. 311, and see Alphabet

Abella, vases from, i. 81;
  fabric of, i. 484

Acanthus-patterns, ii. 223

_Acetabulum_, ii. 469

Achaeans in Cyprus, i. 245, and see 275

Acheloös, ii. 83, 101

Achilles on vases, ii. 120 ff.;
  fight over body of, i. 323

Acids used for cleaning vases, i. 40, 41

Aco Acastus, potter, ii. 517

_Acratophorum_, ii. 464

Acrobats, ii. 165, 182

Actors on vases, i. 473, ii. 160 ff., 197

_Adjuvate, sodales_, inscription on lamp, ii. 411, 422

Admetos and Alkestis, ii. 102, 140, 310, 312

Adonis, ii. 42

Adrastos, ii. 119

_Aecetiae pocolom_, i. 490

Aegean pottery, i. 262 ff., 275

—— Islands, vase-finds in the, i. 54 ff.

Aegina, personified, ii. 19, 82;
  vases from, i. 54, 308, 492

Aegisthos, death of, ii. 138

Aeneas on vases, ii. 129, 135;
  on lamps, ii. 414, 421

Aeolis, finds in, i. 62;
  pottery of, i. 339, 347, 356

Aeolus, ii. 14

Aeson, vase-painter, i. 444

Aesop on vase, ii. 151;
  on lamp, ii. 415;
  fables of, on lamps, ii. 416

“Affected” amphorae, i. 387

Africa, types of tombs in, i. 36;
  vases from, i. 67;
  Ionic pottery of, i. 340 ff.;
  relations with Ionia, i. 355;
  lamps from, ii. 399, 406, 427;
  bust of, on lamp, ii. 412

??a?µa, i. 98

Agamedes and Trophonios, ii. 140

Agamemnon on vases, ii. 126, 137

Agia Paraskevi (Cyprus), i. 35, 66, 246

Agon, ii. 89, 194

Agra, mysteries of, ii. 27, 104

Agriculture on vases, ii. 171

Agrigentum, see Girgenti

Agrios, myth of, ii. 141

Agrippa, painter on terracotta, i. 119, ii. 366

Aigeus, ii. 108

Aithra, ii. 24

Ajax, son of Oïleus, ii. 134, 135

—— son of Telamon, ii. 124, 128, 129;
  death of, ii. 133, 310

Akamas and Demophon, ii. 135

??at??, i. 186

???at?f????, i. 173

Akratos, i. 88, ii. 64

????t???a, i. 97 ff.

Aktaeon on vases, ii. 35, 310;
  on lamps, ii. 414;
  on Gaulish pottery, ii. 508

Aktor and Astyoche, ii. 143

??aßast?????, i. 133

Alabastron, i. 196, 308, 312, 492

Alba Longa, i. 79;
  hut-urns from, ii. 288

Alcaeus quoted, i. 133;
  on vases, ii. 151

Alexander the Great on Arretine vase, ii. 494


Alexandria, vases from, i. 67, 146;
  porcelain ware of, i. 129;
  wine-amphorae from, i. 154 ff.

Alexandrine subjects on vases, i. 502;
  in Gaulish terracottas, ii. 386;
  on Roman lamps, ii. 418;
  on Arretine vases, ii. 489

Alkestis, see Admetos

Alkmena, i. 480, ii. 19

Alkyoneus, ii. 100

Allegory on vases, i. 21

Allier, valley of, as centre for Gaulish terracottas, ii. 380 ff.;
  for pottery, ii. 533;
  clay of, ii. 434

Allifae, pottery of, ii. 475, 478

???pe??, ii. 179, 200

Alphabet, introduction into Greece and early varieties, ii. 245 ff.;
  scheme of early varieties, ii. 248;
  Attic, i. 12, ii. 246, 268;
  early Etruscan, ii. 296, 311

Altemura, vases from, i. 85

Alyzia, inscribed tile from, i. 102

Amasis, king of Egypt, i. 345

—— potter, i. 381 ff., 387

—— vase-painter, i. 439

Amathus, pottery from, i. 36, 66, 147, 250, 253

Amazons on vases, ii. 99, 111, 132, 144, 195;
  on lamps, ii. 415

America, museums of, i. 26, 30

Amorgos, pottery from, i. 56, 262

Amphiaraos, i. 76, 318, ii. 118

Amphion, ii. 117

Amphitrite, ii. 23, 189

_Amphitruo_ of Rhinthon, see i. 473

Amphorae, forms of Greek, i. 153 ff.;
  Apulian, i. 162, 469;
  Attic, i. 295, 368, 372, 411;
  Chalcidian, i. 322;
  Melian, i. 57, 301;
  Nicosthenic, i. 385;
  Panathenaic, i. 46, 69, 84, 132, 145, 388 ff.;
  “Tyrrhenian,” i. 160, 324;
  “affected,” i. 387;
  “false-necked,” i. 246, 271;
  ornamentation of, i. 375, ii. 234;
  prices paid for, i. 44 ff.;
  ancient examples at Erythrae, i. 205;
  used as wine-jars, i. 154 ff.;
  Roman, ii. 460 ff.

?µf?t??, i. 186

_Ampulla_, ii. 465

Amyklae, pottery from, i. 52

Amykos, ii. 115

Amymone, ii. 24

Anakles, potter, i. 384

Anakreon on vases, ii. 152

Analyses of pottery, i. 203, ii. 301, 435

Ananke, ii. 69, 90

??a????de?, ii. 178

Andernach, Roman pottery from, ii. 500, 502, 509, 522, 533

Andokides, potter, i. 386, 401, ii. 258

Andromache and Astyanax, ii. 131

Andromeda, ii. 113

??es?d??a, ii. 75

Animals on early vases, see Chapters VI.–VIII. _passim_;
  as subjects on vases, ii. 184 ff.;
  on lamps, ii. 418;
  as pets, ii. 168, 173

Annia Arescusana, potter, ii. 367

_Annum novum faustum felicem_, inscription on lamps, ii. 398, 420

_Ansae lunulatae_, ii. 287

Antaios, i. 431, ii. 100

Antefixal ornaments, Greek, i. 97 ff.;
  Etruscan, ii. 317;
  Roman, ii. 343 ff., and see 365, 371

_Ante-Homerica_, subjects from, ii. 4, 119 ff.

_Antepagmentum_, ii. 315, 365

Anthedon, vases from, i. 53

Antonius Epaphras, M., potter, ii. 367

Anzi, vases found at, i. 83, 481

Apate, ii. 90

Apes on vases, i. 355, ii. 185

Aphidna, early pottery from, i. 49, 278

Aphrodite, in terracottas, i. 123 ff.;
  dedications to, at Naukratis, i. 345;
  representations of, on vases, ii. 42 ff., 191;
  on cup in B. M., i. 434, 457;
  with Persephone, ii. 28, 42;
  at Judgment of Paris, ii. 122;
  on mural reliefs, ii. 368;
  in Gaulish terracottas, ii. 385;
  on lamps, ii. 410;
  and see Venus

Apollo, dedications to, i. 139, 345;
  representations of, on vases, ii. 29 ff., 189;
  in Gigantomachia, ii. 13, 15;
  with Herakles, ii. 33, 97, 103;
  on mural reliefs, ii. 368;
  on lamps, ii. 409;
  and see Helios

Apollodoros, vase-painter, i. 439

Apollonia, vases from, i. 60

Appius, L., potter, ii. 490

_Appliqué_ reliefs, i. 119, 497;
  at Lezoux, ii. 529;
  and see ?µß??µata

Apuleius quoted, ii. 403

Apulia, vases from, i. 83 ff.;
  local pottery of, ii. 323 ff.;
  painted pottery of, i. 468 ff., 485, 486;
  shapes, i. 144, 171, 178, 179, 469;
  ornamentation, i. 468, ii. 235;
  arrangement of subjects on, ii. 209;
  inscriptions on, ii. 271 ff.;
  sepulchral subjects on, i. 144, 476, ii. 157;
  scenes from Under-world on, ii. 67 ff.

Aqueducts, use of brick in, ii. 336

Archemoros, ii. 118

???e?a?t??, ii. 92

Archers, ii. 177, 178, 199

Archikles, potter, i. 374, 384

Architecture, terracotta used in, i. 91 ff.;
  in Etruria, ii. 314 ff.;
  at Rome and Pompeii, ii. 330 ff.;
  use of bricks and tiles in, i. 91 ff., ii. 336 ff., 343;
  use of vases in, ii. 457;
  treatment of, in vase-paintings, ii. 205 ff.;
  imitations of, in arrangement of designs, i. 378, ii. 207;
  in patterns, ii. 211

Archons, names of, on vases, i. 69, 390

??d?????, i. 167

Ares on vases, ii. 41, 190;
  in Gigantomachia, ii. 13, 15;
  on lamps, ii. 409

Arezzo, pottery found at, i. 29, 72, ii. 479, 481;
  potters’ tools and stamps from, i. 207, ii. 438, 439, 493;
  and see Arretium

Argolis, pottery from, i. 51;
  as centre of fabric, i. 274, 298, 307, 336;
  inscriptions in alphabet of, i. 308, 335, 357, ii. 249

Argonauts on vases, i. 442, ii. 115, and see ii. 104

Argos, vases from, i. 52

—— guardian of Io, ii. 20

Ariadne on vases, ii. 57, 110, 298

Aridikes and Telephanes, painters, i. 312, 320, 395

Arimaspi, ii. 148

Aristonoös, vase of, i. 168, 297, ii. 249

Aristophanes quoted or referred to, i. 132, 143, ii. 266

—— vase painter, i. 444

Arkesilaos of Kyrene, i. 341 ff., ii. 149;
  cup with subject of, i. 44, 341 ff., ii. 149, 250

—— sculptor and modeller, ii. 372

Arles, pottery from, ii. 524

Armed foot-race, ii. 164

Armento, vases from, i. 83

Arming of warriors, ii. 175

Armour, how represented, ii. 198

Arrangement of subjects on vases, ii. 206 ff.

Arretine vases, ii. 479 ff.;
  connection of, with Gaulish ware, ii. 500, 517 ff.

Arretium as centre of fabric, ii. 432, 475, 477;
  and see Arezzo

Artemis, on lamps, i. 107, ii. 409;
  on vases, ii. 30 ff., 35, 190;
  in Gigantomachia, ii. 13, 15;
  as Aidos, ii. 90;
  Asiatic, i. 56, 289, 301, ii. 35;
  Diktynna, i. 497, ii. 35

Artis on kilns at Castor, ii. 435, 447 ff.

Artistic aspects of study of vases, i. 13, and see i. 20

Artists’ signatures, ii. 244, 257 ff., 272;
  list of, ii. 273 ff.;
  Athenian, i. 379 ff., 420 ff., ii. 257 ff.

???st??, ???st????, i. 179

???ta??a, i. 179

Aryballos, i. 127, 197, 300;
  Corinthian, i. 312;
  later type, i. 412, 492

Ashmolean Museum, see Oxford

Asia personified, ii. 81

Asia Minor, vase-collections in, i. 30;
  tombs of, i. 34;
  vase-finds in, i. 61, 330, 356;
  lamps from, i. 108;
  porcelain ware from, i. 129

Asiatic art, influence of, on Arretine ware, ii. 489;
  and see Ionic

Asine, pottery from, i. 52

Asklepios, ii. 76;
  on lamp (?), ii. 416

Askos, i. 119, 129, 199;
  local Apulian, ii. 325, 326

Assariik, pottery from, i. 64, 280, 340

Assos, pottery from, i. 62

Assteas, vase-painter, i. 81, 83, 472, 474, 478 ff., ii. 104, 271

Assyrian bricks and cylinders, i. 6, 7;
  enamels, i. 8;
  textile fabrics, i. 312, 333, 334;
  influence on Greek pottery, i. 295, 333;
  and see Oriental

Asti, see Hasta


?st???µ?? on tiles, i. 101

Astyanax, ii. 131, 134

Atalante, ii. 141, 142;
  on Gaulish vase, ii. 532

—— in Lokris, vases found at, i. 53

Ate, ii. 90

Ateius, Cn., potter, ii. 500

Athamas (?), see Salmoneus

Athena, on vases, i. 323, ii. 37 ff.;
  types of, ii. 190;
  statues of, ii. 40, 134, and see Palladion;
  Parthenos on vases, i. 449, 451;
  Promachos, i. 389;
  with Poseidon on vase, i. 464, 497, ii. 24;
  on lamp, ii. 409;
  birth of, i. 370, 396, ii. 15, 294;
  birth-type used for other scenes, i. 388;
  with Herakles, ii. 38, 105;
  in Trojan scenes, ii. 39, 133;
  at Judgment of Paris, ii. 122

Athenaeus on shapes of vases, i. 148 ff.;
  on drinking-cups, i. 180 ff.

????a??? on tile from Marathon, i. 99

Athenian artists or potters, i. 379 ff., 421 ff., ii. 255 ff.;
  migration of, to other parts, i. 464, 465;
  festivals, ii. 156;
  horsemen or knights, ii. 166, 177, 179;
  sepulchral reliefs, i. 477, ii. 158;
  tribal heroes, ii. 140;
  vases made for Cyprus, i. 255;
  exported to other parts, i. 11, 405, 458, 464;
  influenced by Ionian, i. 294, 295, 388;
  contrasted with Ionian, i. 332, 356;
  chronology of, i. 401 ff., 463, ii. 270;
  and see generally Dipylon, Proto-Attic, Black-figured, Red-figured;
  white lekythi, i. 48, 54, 86, 132, 142, 196, 454 ff., ii. 157

Athens, history of, in connection with vases, i. 11, 369, 418, 463;
  finds of vases at, i. 12, 33, 46 ff.;
  of lamps, i. 108;
  museum of, i. 26, 30, 48;
  Acropolis, finds on, i. 33, 48, 138, 402;
  tombs at, i. 33, 47, 142, 147;
  modern forgers at, i. 43;
  potters’ quarter at, i. 89, 231;
  public measure at, i. 135;
  early artistic position of, i. 235, 292, 369;
  art of painting at, i. 396 ff., 409, 441 ff., 454;
  pottery of, see Chapters VI., VII., IX.-XI. _passim_;
  its native origin, i. 20, 278;
  inscriptions on vases, ii. 255 ff., and see Attic;
  termination of vase-painting at, i. 463 ff.

Athletes on vases, i. 417, 476, ii. 162 ff.;
  attire of, ii. 197

Atilius, K., potter, i. 502

Atlantes of terracotta at Pompeii, ii. 374

Atlas, ii. 75

Atreus and Thyestes, ii. 141

_Attegia tegulicia_, ii. 342

Attic alphabet, i. 12, ii. 246, 268;
  dialect, ii. 237, 255;
  inscriptions, i. 291, 296, 325, 370, 379, ii. 255 ff.;
  palaeography of, ii. 268 ff.;
  comedy reflected on vases, i. 473, 483, 484;
  legends on vases, ii. 138 ff.

Attica, finds of pottery in, i. 49, 278 ff.;
  and see Athens

Auge, i. 474, ii. 104

Aulis, scenes at, ii. 124

Aurae, ii. 81, 193

Auster, stamp of, ii. 440

_Australis_ on Roman tile, ii. 359

Austria, vase-collections of, i. 28

Auvergne, potteries in, ii. 504;
  and see Lezoux

_Avot_ for _fecit_, ii. 382, 509


Babylonia, bricks of, i. 6, 8, 91, 94;
  cylinders and tablets, i. 7;
  enamels, i. 8

Bacchic scenes, see Dionysiac

Bacchylides and vase-paintings, ii. 6

Baking, of terracottas, i. 116;
  of vases, i. 214 ff.;
  ovens for, i. 105;
  and see Kilns

Ball-games, ii. 167

Banassac, fabric of, ii. 524

Banquet-scenes, ii. 180 ff.;
  use of kylix in, i. 188

Barbarians on vases, i. 420, ii. 178 ff.

Barbotine decoration, i. 130, 210, ii. 438, 442, 505, 512;
  in Germany, ii. 513, 536;
  at Lezoux, ii. 528, 529;
  at Castor, ii. 544

Bargates, potter, ii. 483

Bari, vases from, i. 84, 86;
  local pottery of, ii. 326

“Base-ring” ware (Cypriote), i. 242

Basile and Echelos, ii. 27, 140

Bathing-scenes, ii. 165, 173

Baths, use of tiles in, i. 103, ii. 342, 346;
  use of bricks in, ii. 331, 335, 339;
  vessels used for, i. 176

—— of Caracalla, arrangements of, ii. 347

Bears on lamps, ii. 398

“Belgic” black ware, ii. 552

Bellerophon on vases, ii. 114;
  on lamps, ii. 414

Benghazi, vases from, i. 68;
  porcelain ware from, i. 129;
  and see Cyrenaica

Berlin Museum, i. 25, 28

_Bibe, amice, de meo_ on Gaulish vase, ii. 524

ß????, i. 164

“Bilingual” vases, i. 387

Biremes on Geometrica vases, i. 291, ii. 178

Blacas krater, i. 409, 443, ii. 78, 79

Black punctured ware (Cypriote), i. 242

—— slip ware (Cypriote), i. 241

—— varnish, i. 210, 219 ff., 371, 405

—— wares (Etruscan), ii. 291;
  mentioned in Latin literature, ii. 304;
  plain Roman, ii. 552;
  and see Etruria, Naukratis, etc.

Black-bodied amphorae, i. 151;
  other vases, i. 221

Black-figured vases, i. 219, 368;
  from Cyprus, i. 255;
  from Ionia, i. 330, 356 ff.;
  technique of, i. 219, 370;
  shapes, i. 372 ff.;
  ornamentation, i. 375 ff., ii. 234;
  subjects, i. 376 ff.;
  artists of, i. 379 ff., ii. 274;
  arrangement of subjects on, ii. 207;
  ?a???-names on, ii. 277;
  transition to R.F., i. 386, 393, 400;
  treatment of eye on, compared with R.F., i. 408;
  subjects compared with R.F., i. 416 ff.;
  varieties of amphora in, i. 159

Blanchet on Gaulish terracottas, ii. 380 ff.;
  on kilns in France, ii. 443, 451;
  on Gaulish pottery-centres, ii. 533

Boar-hunts on vases, i. 315, ii. 166;
  and see Calydonian

Boat-shaped vases, i. 186;
  lamps, ii. 403

Böhlau on Geometrical pottery, i. 286 ff.;
  on Proto-Attic, i. 292;
  on Phaleron ware, i. 298;
  on Ionic pottery, i. 336 ff.

Boeotia, pottery from, i. 52;
  tiles from, i. 102;
  terracottas from, i. 118, 123, 290;
  Mycenaean pottery from, i. 274;
  Geometrical, i. 52, 159, 286;
  bronze fibulae of, i. 290;
  Proto-Corinthian vases, i. 307;
  later local fabrics, i. 300, 391, 451;
  vases with reliefs, i. 497;
  alphabet of, ii. 252;
  artists’ signatures, ii. 252, 273

Boiae, foundation of (?), ii. 143

Bologna, vases from, i. 72;
  Villanuova civilisation at, ii. 285

Bolsena, vases from, i. 73, 501

Bomarzo, vases from, i. 74

ß?µß?????, i. 198

Borax, use of, for red glaze, ii. 437

Boreades, ii. 81, 115, 116

Boreas, ii. 80, 115, 194

Boriedus, potter, ii. 551

Boston Museum, i. 26, 30;
  vase in, ii. 483

Bowls, Megarian or Homeric, i. 50, 53, 134, 185, 499;
  for libations, i. 140, 192, ii. 471;
  “Italian Megarian,” ii. 490;
  forms of Gaulish, ii. 501, 520 ff.;
  and see _Calix_, _Patera_, Phiale

Boxers, ii. 163

Braziers, i. 105

Bricks, use of, in Babylonia, i. 6, 91;
  in Greece, i. 89 ff.;
  in Etruria, ii. 314;
  at Rome, ii. 331, 336, 340, 352;
  at Pompeii, ii. 337;
  sun-dried, i. 91 ff., ii. 331, 335;
  baked, i. 95, ii. 334 ff.;
  sizes of Roman, ii. 332;
  methods of construction in, ii. 337 ff.;
  stamps and inscriptions on, ii. 352 ff.;
  and see Tiles

Bridal scenes, see Marriage

Britain, vase-collections in, i. 27;
  use of brick in, ii. 332, 337, and see 335;
  tiles from, ii. 346, 348, 358, 359, 363;
  terracotta statuettes from, ii. 379, 384;
  kilns found in, ii. 444, 445, 454;
  wine-amphorae, ii. 461;
  Roman pottery found in, ii. 540 ff.;
  imported wares, ii. 504, 540;
  subjects, 508;
  types and chronological sequence, ii. 540;
  barbotine wares in, ii. 513, 544;
  Rutenian, ii. 522;
  Lezoux ware, ii. 529;
  “false Samian” ware, ii. 541;
  potters’ names from, ii. 542;
  local fabrics, ii. 543 ff.;
  plain wares, ii. 549 ff.;
  and see Castor, New Forest, Upchurch

British Museum, i. 17, 24, 27;
  prices paid by, for vases, i. 43 ff.

—— School at Athens, excavations of, i. 57, 262, 265

???µ?a?, i. 186

Brongniart on Greek vases, i. 203;
  on _bucchero_, ii. 301;
  on plain Roman wares, ii. 437, 548

Bronze, workers in, ii. 171;
  imitations of, in _bucchero_ ware, ii. 303;
  in Roman pottery, ii. 528, 552

—— Age in Cyprus, i. 35, 66, 206, 237 ff.;
  in Italy, ii. 283 ff.;
  porcelain ware of, i. 127

Brunn on Melian reliefs, i. 120

Brushes used for painting vases, i. 227

Brygos, potter, i. 421, 437, ii. 256

_Bucchero_ ware in Cyprus, i. 242;
  in Etruria, ii. 289, 295, 301 ff.

Bucket, see ??d??, Situla

Bularchos, painter, i. 361, 363

Burgon vases, i. 45, 47, 57, 145, 285, 295

Burial scenes, and use of vases in, see Funeral

Burlesques, ii. 159;
  and see Caricatures, Comedy

Busiris, ii. 102

Busts of terracotta (funereal), i. 123

Butades, i. 98, 110

Butrio, potter, ii. 527


Cacus, ii. 100

_Cadus_, ii. 463;
  and see ??d??

Caecilius Saevus, L., lamp-maker, ii. 406, 423, 425, 428

Caere, see Cervetri

Caeretan hydriae, i. 166, 353 ff., ii. 308;
  allied fabrics, i. 356 ff.

Caesar, C. Julius, his finds of vases at Corinth, i. 134

Caistor-by-Norwich, kiln at, ii. 445, 449

Calene phialae, i. 502, and see ii. 490

Calidius Strigo, potter, ii. 482

_Calix_, ii. 468;
  and see Bowl, Kylix

Calvi (Cales), vases from, i. 81, 119, 146, 191, 502

Calydonian boar-hunt, ii. 114, 294

Calyx-patterns, ii. 221

Cambridge, Fitzwilliam Museum, i. 27

Cambridgeshire, Roman tombs in, ii. 351, 456

Campania, vases found in, i. 80, 146;
  amphorae of, i. 162, 469, 484;
  fabrics of, i. 467 ff., 482 ff.;
  local, i. 227, 484;
  Roman pottery in, ii. 475, 478

Candelabrum-amphorae, i. 162

Canino, i. 44, 76;
  and see Vulci

Canoleius, L., potter, i. 502

Canopic jars (Etruscan), ii. 304

Canosa, vases from, i. 84, 118, 146, 487

_Capedo, capis_, ii. 471

Capitoline Jupiter, temple of, ii. 314, 371, and see i. 116;
  statue of, ii. 314, 372

Capua, vases from, i. 81, ii. 488, 493;
  tiles from, i. 98, 103;
  vases with gilding from, i. 210, 231, 498;
  forgeries made at, i. 42

Caria, pottery from, i. 64, 330, 340

Caricatures on vases, i. 392

Carthage, lamps from, ii. 397, 399, 405, 422;
  Gaulish vase at, ii. 523

Casks, see Dolium, Pithos

Castor, kilns of, ii. 435, 437, 444, 446 ff.;
   ware of, ii. 543, and see 442, 536

_Catagrapha_, i. 397, 455

Catalogues of vases, i. 26 ff.;
  and see Bibliography in Vol. I.

_Catinus_ and _catillus_, ii. 469

Cato on terracotta sculpture at Rome, ii. 373

Caudebec, terracotta figure from, ii. 384

Cave-dwellings, pottery from, i. 4

Ceglie, vases from, i. 84

Centaurs, ii. 102, 111, 145, 195

Centorbi, vases from, i. 87

Cerialis, potter, ii. 439, 511, 536

Cerigo, see Kythera

Cervetri (Caere), vases from, i. 75, ii. 292 ff., 297, 307, 308;
  architectural terracottas from, i. 98, ii. 315, 317;
  vases with reliefs from, i. 496, ii. 292;
  painted slabs from, ii. 299, 319;
  Regulini-Galassi tomb at, ii. 300;
  _abecedaria_ from, ii. 311;
  sarcophagi from, ii. 317, 321

Cesnola, i. 65

Chachrylion, potter, i. 420, 424, 427, 430

cha?re ka? p?ei e?, i. 373, ii. 265

Chalcidian vases, i. 321 ff.;
  alphabet and inscriptions, ii. 253

Chalcosthenes or Caicosthenes, i. 92

Chalkis as pottery centre, i. 55, 307, 321 ff., 495

Chamber-tombs (Etruscan), ii. 294 ff.

Chares, vase-painter, i. 315

Charinos, potter, i. 411, 492

Chariot-scenes on vases, ii. 164, 166, 176;
  on lamps, ii. 417, 422

Charioteer, dress of, ii. 198

Charon, i. 459, ii. 69, 193

Charun, ii. 69, 193, 310

Cheiron, ii. 95, 120, 145

Chelis, potter, i. 420, 424, 427

Chequer-patterns, ii. 215

Chest of Kypselos, see Kypselos

Chevron-patterns, ii. 214

Chigi vase, i. 309

Children, vases used by, i. 137;
  subjects relating to, ii. 167, 174

Chimaera, ii. 114, 148

Chiton, treatment of, on vases, i. 372, ii. 200

Chiusi, vases from, i. 73;
  as centre for Etruscan pottery, ii. 302, 304

Christian lamps, ii. 404, 420

Chronology of Cypriote pottery, i. 245 ff.;
  of Cretan, i. 265;
  of R.F. vases, i. 401 ff., 463, ii. 271;
  of Gaulish terracottas, ii. 385;
  of Roman lamps, ii. 399 ff.;
  of Gaulish pottery, ii. 501 ff., 516 ff.

Chrysaor, ii. 112

Chryse, ii. 105, 115, 124

Chrysos, ii. 85, 88

Chthonian deities, in terracottas, i. 123 ff.;
  on vases, ii. 67 ff.

??t?a, i. 174

??t?e??, ??t??p?????, i. 232

Ciborium, i. 186, ii. 468

Cicero quoted, ii. 365, 371

Cincelli, potteries at, ii. 480, 483

Cinerary urns, i. 144 ff.;
  Etruscan, ii. 285, 288;
  Roman, ii. 456, and see 550;
  and see _Ossuaria_

Cinnamus, potter, ii. 527

Circle-patterns, ii. 216

Circus, scenes from, on mural reliefs, ii. 370;
  on lamps, ii. 417, 422

Cistae, Etruscan, compared with vases, ii. 307

Cities personified, ii. 81, 82, 194

Civil use of pottery, see Measures

Civita Castellana, see Falerii

—— Lavinia, terracottas from, i. 98, 101, ii. 316, 317

—— Vecchia, vases from, i. 74

Classical literature, see Literature

Clay, earliest working in, i. 5 ff.;
  uses of, i. 89 ff.;
  varieties of, i. 113, 204;
  used for bricks and tiles, i. 90 ff., ii. 333 ff.;
  for sarcophagi, i. 104;
  for models, i. 111, ii. 375;
  for porcelain objects, i. 127;
  in sculpture, i. 109 ff., ii. 314, 317, 371 ff.;
  nature of, for terracotta figures, i. 113, ii. 380;
  for mural reliefs, ii. 366;
  for lamps, ii. 404;
  for Roman pottery, ii. 434 ff., 548;
  preparation of, for vases, i. 202 ff.;
  representations of digging for, ii. 170

Clazomenae, vases from, i. 62, 64, 330, 354, 356;
  as centre of Ionic fabric, i. 350, 354;
  sarcophagi of, i. 62, 362 ff.;
  compared with vases, i. 350 ff.

Cobnertus, potter, ii. 440

Coins, terracotta moulds for, i. 106, ii. 390 ff.;
  compared with R.F. vases, i. 426;
  evidence of, for Greek alphabets, ii. 246

Colchester, terracottas from, ii. 384;
  kilns at, ii. 445;
  vase from, ii. 544

Collections of vases, early, i. 16 ff.;
  list of existing, i. 27 ff.

Colours used for terracottas, i. 116;
  for vases, i. 230;
  in Etruscan art, ii. 299, 321 ff.;
  for mural reliefs, ii. 366

Combats, ii. 175 ff.;
  and see Gladiators

Comedy, scenes from, on vases, i. 473, ii. 160

Comitialis, potter, ii. 511

“Complementary” method of representation, ii. 10

Concentric circles, Cypriote, i. 251, ii. 216

_Conclamatio_, ii. 157

Concrete, use of, in Roman buildings, ii. 335 ff.

Condatomagus, see Graufesenque

_Congius_, ii. 472

Consuls, names of, on tiles, ii. 360;
  on vases, ii. 462, 512

“Continuous” method of representation, ii. 10

Convivial inscriptions, ii. 265, 524, 538

Cooking-vessels, i. 174, ii. 470

Corfu, vases from, i. 54; tiles from, i. 101

Corinth, its early commercial and artistic importance, i. 11, 303;
  finds of pottery at, i. 50, 139, 304, 305, 307;
  amphora-handles from, i. 158;
  clay of, i. 304, 305;
  industries of, represented on vases, i. 207, 216, 305, 317, ii. 170

Corinthian krater, i. 168;
  kylix, i. 190;
  painters, i. 312, 320, 395;
  pinakes, i. 51, 139, 207, 216, 224, 305, 316, ii. 23, 170, 249, 251;
  vases generally, i. 304 ff.;
  sites where found, i. 304;
  classification, i. 305 ff.;
  shapes, i. 311 ff., 317;
  ornamentation, i. 311 ff., 320, ii. 233;
  subjects, i. 314, 318;
  inscriptions, i. 315, 326, ii. 249 ff.;
  potters’ names, i. 315, ii. 250, 273;
  imitations of, i. 321;
  types from, on “Tyrrhenian” amphorae, i. 326;
  points of contact with Ionia, i. 329 ff.;
  found in Etruria, i. 77, 318, ii. 294 ff., 307

Corintho-Attic vases, see Tyrrhenian

Cornelius, P., potter, ii. 482

Corneto, vases from, i. 74, ii. 284

Cornices of terracotta, i. 97, ii. 344

Cosmogonic deities, ii. 73 ff.

Costume on Greek vases, ii. 200 ff.

Countries personified, ii. 81, 82, 194

“Courting”-scenes, i. 475, ii. 183

_Crater_, see Krater

Crescent patterns, ii. 218

Cretan bull, ii. 96

Crete, finds in, i. 59, 152, 263 ff.;
  _ossuaria_ in, i. 145, 272;
  ethnography of, i. 264;
  early pottery of, i. 265 ff.;
  as Mycenaean centre, i. 269, 274;
  influence on later pottery, i. 276;
  the island personified, ii. 82

Crimea, vases from, i. 60, 330, 340, 447, 448, 464;
  wine-amphorae from, i. 158

Croesus, see Kroisos

_Crudus_, used of bricks, i. 90, 92;
  of vases, i. 214

“Cult of Tomb” on lekythi, i. 143, 459, 460, ii. 158;
  on Apulian vases, i. 144, 476, ii. 158

Cumae, vases from, i. 80, 210;
  fabrics of, i. 483, ii. 478

Cupid, see Eros

Cups, see Drinking-cup, Kylix, etc.

Curetes and infant Zeus, ii. 368

Curium, tombs at, i. 36, 255, and see 66, 67;
  vases from, i. 128, 243 ff., 488

Cyathus, ii. 467;
  and see Kyathos

Cyclades, finds in, i. 56;
  early pottery of, i. 9, 56, 260 ff., 303

Cyclic poets and vase-subjects, ii. 4, 119 ff.

_Cycnus_, scene from drama of, ii. 531

Cylinders, Assyrian, i. 7

Cyprus, vase-collections in, i. 30;
  tombs in, i. 34 ff.;
  finds of pottery, i. 65, 237, 240, 250, 273, 280;
  terracottas, i. 112, 123 ff.;
  general character of pottery, i. 236;
  shapes of vases,. i. 238, 252;
  Bronze-Age pottery, i. 66, 206, 237 ff.;
  Mycenaean pottery, i. 239, 244;
  Graeco-Phoenician, i. 247 ff.;
  Hellenic, i. 255;
  Roman, ii. 495, 499;
  ethnology of inhabitants, i. 240, 248;
  chronology of pottery, i. 250

Cyrenaica, tombs in, i. 36;
  vases from, i. 69, 465;
  terracottas, i. 125, 126;
  and see Kyrene

Cyrene, see Kyrene


Daidalos, see Ikaros

Daily life, scenes from, on vases, i. 417, 449, 475, ii. 154 ff.;
  on lamps, ii. 416 ff.;
  of women and children, ii. 172 ff.

Dali, pottery of, i. 250, 273

Danaë, ii. 19, 112

Danaids, ii. 68

Danaos (?), ii. 140

Dancing scenes on Greek vases, ii. 168, 182;
  on Arretine vases, see Hieroduli

Daphnae, pottery from, i. 68, 349 ff.;
  Fikellura style at, i. 338, 352;
  scale-pattern used at, i. 311, 337, 352, ii. 218

Dardanus, see Troad

Dareios in council, ii. 151

Daulis, vases from, i. 53

Dawn, see Eos

Death-deities, ii. 72;
  and see Thanatos

Déchelette on Gaulish pottery, ii. 432, 504 ff., 516 ff.

Decoration of vases, artistic value of, i. 14;
  see Ornamentation, Subjects

Decorative patterns, see Ornamental

Dedicatory inscriptions on Greek vases, i. 139, ii. 242;
  on lamps, ii. 421

Deepdene, collection of vases at, i. 17, 27, 323

Deianeira, ii. 102, 104

Deinos (vase-shape), i. 173

Deities, terracotta statuettes of, i. 122;
  Gaulish, ii. 384 ff.;
  representations of, on vases, see Chaps. XII., XIII.;
  on lamps, ii. 408 ff.;
  Etruscan, ii. 310

Delos as centre of vase-fabric (?), i. 57, 302;
  braziers made at, i. 105

Delphi, pottery from, i. 53

Delphic scenes on vases, ii. 29 ff., 103, 138

Delphiniform lamps, ii. 399

Demeter, ii. 26 ff., 189;
  bust of, in terracotta, i. 123

Demons, on braziers, i. 105;
  and see Death-deities

??µ?s?a on tiles, i. 102;
  on a washing-basin, ii. 260

??µ?s??? on a measure, i. 135

Demosthenes, allusions to vases in, i. 133, 142

Dennis, explorations of, in the Cyrenaica, i. 36;
  in Etruria, i. 38;
  in Sicily, i. 87

Departure-scenes on vases, ii. 176

d?pa?, i. 148, 181

_Depositio_-scenes, i. 459, ii. 157

Descriptive names, ii. 91, 260

Devices on shields, ii. 198

Diadumenos, terracotta figure of, i. 126

Diana on Gaulish pottery, ii. 507, 508;
  and see Artemis

Diitrephes (?), ii. 151

Dike, ii. 69, 89

Dimini, pottery from, i. 54

d?µ???? (of lamps), i. 107

Diocletian, tile-stamps in reign of, ii. 353, 362

Diogenes on lamp, ii. 415, 421;
  tub of, i. 151

Diomedes, horses of, ii. 98

—— in Trojan scenes, ii. 127, 128, 133

Diomos (tribal hero) ?, ii. 140

Dionysiac personifications, ii. 64 ff., 91;
  scenes on vases, ii. 32, 54, 57 ff.;
  on R.F. vases, i. 416;
  on mural reliefs, ii. 369;
  on lamps, ii. 411;
  on Arretine vases, ii. 492, 493

Dionysos on vases, ii. 55 ff., 191;
  in ship, i. 381;
  in Gigantomachia, ii. 14, 56;
  birth of, ii. 19, 55;
  in Attica, ii. 139;
  sacrifices to, i. 140, ii. 60

Dioskuri on vases, ii. 93, 115, 194;
  on lamps, ii. 413

Diota, i. 154, 163, ii. 460

Dipylon, cemetery of, i. 9, 48, 280;
  vases from, i. 48, 247, 253, 255, 280 ff.;
  ornamentation, i. 282, ii. 232;
  subjects, i. 285, ii. 157, 178;
  chronology, i. 291;
  influence on later vases, i. 293, 298;
  early inscribed vase from, ii. 243

Discovery of vases, circumstances of, i. 33 ff.

Discs of terracotta of unknown use, i. 105, 106

_Discus_ (d?s???), name of vase, i. 194, ii. 469;
  part of lamp, ii. 395

Dishes, Greek, i. 194;
  Roman, ii. 468

Diskos, throwing of, ii. 163

Divixtus, potter, ii. 527

Dodwell pyxis, i. 50, 315, ii. 250

Dörpfeld, discoveries of, at Troy, i. 61, 153, 257, 259

????µas?a of Athenian knights, ii. 177

_Doliarius_, ii. 457, 511

_Dolium_, ii. 438, 457 ff.;
  and see Pithos

Dolls of terracotta, i. 113, 114, 120

Dolon, story of, i. 363, ii. 128

Domestic use of vases, i. 136, 138, and see 252;
  Roman, ii. 431, 455 ff., 549 ff.

_Domitia gens_, tiles of, ii. 357, 358

Dorian invasion, i. 245, 277

Doric architecture, use of tiles in, i. 94;
  dialect used at Athens, ii. 256

Douai, potters’ stamps from, ii. 503

Dragendorff on Roman pottery in Greece, ii. 476, 498;
  on Arretine ware, ii. 482,
489 ff.;
  on provincial ware, ii. 499 ff.;
  on Roman red glaze, ii. 435

Drain-pipes, see Pipes

Drama, subjects from, on late vases, i. 471 ff., ii. 7, 159 ff.

Drapery, treatment of, on B.F. vases, i. 372;
  on R.F., i. 408;
  and see ii. 201

Drawing on Greek vases, technique of, i. 222 ff.;
  on B.F. vases, i. 371;
  on R.F., i. 406 ff.;
  on white-ground vases, i. 457;
  on South Italian, i. 470;
  and see i. 396

Dress on vases, see Costume, Drapery

Dressel on tile-stamps, ii. 352 ff.;
  on Arretine stamps, ii. 486, 487

Drinking-cups, i. 148 ff., 180 ff.;
  Roman, ii. 467, and see 475

Dümmler on Cypriote pottery, i. 240;
  on Rhodian, i. 336;
  on Daphnae pottery, i. 350;
  on Caeretan vases, i. 354;
  on “Pontic,” i. 359;
  on Etruscan imitations of Caeretan, ii. 308

Duris, vase-painter, i. 21, 421, 434 ff., 440, ii. 263, 268


Earth-Mother, see Gaia, ?????t??f??

_Echea_, ii. 457

Echelos, see Basile

Echo, ii. 81;
  and see Pan

Egg-pattern, ii. 220

????t???, ii. 167

Egnazia, see Gnatia

???a?e, form of signature, i. 379, 422, ii. 257 ff., 273 ff.

Egypt, pre-dynastic pottery of, i. 4;
  brick used in, i. 6, 94;
  use of wheel in, i. 7;
  enamels of, i. 8;
  pottery found in, i. 67;
  lamps in, i. 107;
  porcelain ware, i. 126 ff.;
  influence of, on Cypriote pottery, i. 239, 247 ff.;
  Cypriote pottery in, i. 239, 242, 243;
  evidence from, for Cretan and Mycenaean pottery, i. 266, 267, 271;
  influence of, in Etruria, ii. 299, 303, 304

Egyptian situla at Daphnae, i. 350;
  subjects on Caeretan vases, i. 355;
  in Roman mural reliefs, ii. 370;
  in Gaulish terracottas, ii. 386;
  on lamps, ii. 402, 403, 412

Egyptians on vases, ii. 180

e?d??a, i. 460, ii. 72, 193

Eileithyia, ii. 15, 76

Eirene, ii. 85

??e??µe?se, form of signature, i. 379, ii. 258

Ekphantos, painter, i. 312, 320, 395

Elateia, tiles from, i. 102

Elektra, ii. 137

Eleusinian mysteries, supposed references to, i. 21;
  scenes relating to, ii. 27;
  and see Demeter, Persephone

Eleusis, finds of vases at, i. 49;
  personified, ii. 82

?????????, i. 107

?µß?f???, i. 124

?µß??µata, i. 130;
  and see _Appliqué_ reliefs

Emperors’ names on tiles, ii. 354 ff.;
  on pottery, ii. 462

Enamelling, i. 8, 126 ff.

Endt on Ionic vases, i. 350, 354 ff.

England, see Britain

Enkelados, ii. 13

Enkomi, vases from, i. 66, 127, 242 ff.

Eos, ii. 79;
  with Kephalos, i. 98, ii. 80;
  with Memnon, ii. 132

Epexegetic system of interpretation, i. 20

Ephebi on R.F. vases, i. 417

?f?ß??, i. 179

?fed??sµ??, ii. 167

Ephialtes, ii. 13

Epic poetry and vases, ii. 3 ff.

Epichysis, i. 179, 469

Epidromos ?a???, i. 425

Epigenes, potter, i. 445

Epiktetos, vase-painter, i. 379, 398, 420, 422, 425;
  cups from school of, i. 417, 425 ff.

Epilykos, vase-painter, i. 424

?p???t???, i. 199

?p???se, form of signature, i. 379, 422, ii. 257 ff., 273 ff.

Epona, ii. 386

Eretria, vases from, i. 55, 458

??e??, i. 194

_Ergasterion_, i. 233

Erginos, potter, i. 444

—— and heralds, ii. 102

Ergotimos, potter, i. 370, 379, 380, ii. 257

Erichthonios, birth of, ii. 139

Erinnyes, see Furies

Eriphyle, ii. 118

Eris, ii. 90, 194

Eros in terracottas, i. 126;
  on vases, i. 377, 418, 475, 486, ii. 45 ff., and see ii. 89;
  types of, i. 486, ii. 45, 48, 191;
  with Aphrodite, ii. 42 ff.;
  on mural reliefs, ii. 369;
  on lamps, ii. 410

Erymanthian boar, ii. 97

Erythrae, amphorae in temple at, i. 205

Esquiline, lamps from, ii. 393, 399, and see 481;
  pottery from, ii. 477

Ethical ideas on vases, ii. 89

Ethiopians, ii. 180

??µ??, i. 175

Ethnography of Crete, i. 264;
  of Mycenaeans, i. 275

Ethnological value of study of vases, i. 10

?t????s??, i. 180

Etruria, discoveries in, i. 19, 72 ff.;
  tombs of, i. 37, 78, 104, 145, ii. 284 ff.;
  architecture of, in terracotta, i. 101, ii. 313 ff.;
  terracotta sarcophagi, i. 104, ii. 299, 317, 320 ff.;
  sculpture in terracotta, i. 109, ii. 313, 317;
  relations with Greece in Geometrical period, i. 292, ii. 289 ff.;
  vase-painting in, i. 358, ii. 307 ff.;
  relief wares of, i. 496, 501, ii. 292 ff.;
  paintings on terracotta, ii. 299, 319;
  earliest civilisation of, ii. 282 ff.;
  earliest pottery, ii. 285;
  wheel-made, ii. 290;
  Villanuova period in, ii. 290 ff.;
  early Greek influence in, ii. 291, 293, 296 ff., 303;
  early Oriental influence, ii. 292, 296 ff.;
  character of art of, ii. 309, 322;
  Roman pottery in, ii. 486, and see Arretine ware

Etruscan alphabet, ii. 311;
  artists at Rome, ii. 372;
  inscriptions on vases, ii. 310;
  pottery, see _Bucchero_, Cervetri, Polledrara

“Etruscan” theory of origin of Greek vases, i. 18, 79

Etruscans, origin of, ii. 281

Euboea personified, ii. 82;
  vases found in, i. 55;
  and see Chalkis, Eretria

Eucheiros, painter, i. 395

Eucheiros, potter, i. 374, 379, 384

Euergides, potter, i. 424

Eumaros, painter, i. 317, 371, 396

Euphorbos-plate or pinax, i. 334, 335, ii. 129, 249

Euphronios, potter and painter, i. 398, 402, 403, 421 ff., 428, 430
   ff., 440

Euripides, subjects from, on vases, i. 472, 500, ii. 162;
  on lamp, ii. 415, 421

Europa, ii. 19

Eurystheus, i. 151, ii. 97

Euthymides, vase-painter, i. 421, 427, ii. 258

Euxitheos, potter, i. 421, 429

Evans, Dr. A. J., discoveries of, i. 59, 152, 265 ff.

????e?pt???, i. 198

Exarchos (Abae), vase from, i. 217

Excavations, vases found in, i. 138;
  and see Chapter II. _passim_

Exclamatory inscriptions on vases, ii. 261 ff.;
  on lamps, ii. 422

Exekias, potter and painter, i. 161, 374, 375, 379, 380 ff., ii. 218,
   257

Explanatory inscriptions on vases, ii. 259 ff.

Expression of figures, i. 398, 408, ii. 202 ff.

Eye, treatment of, on vases, ii. 203;
  on Ionic, i. 356;
  on Attic, i. 408

Eyes on vases, i. 257, 357, 410, 426, 427


Fables on Roman lamps, ii. 416

Fabricius Masculus, L., lamp-maker, ii. 424, 425

Fabroni on Roman pottery, ii. 437, 479

Falerii (Civita Castellana), vases found or made at, i. 75, 485, ii.
   301, 309;
  early settlements at, ii. 289

False amphora (Mycenaean), i. 271

“False Samian” ware, ii. 474, 502, 541

Farces, scenes from, on vases, i. 473, ii. 159 ff.

Fasano, vases found at, i. 85;
  and see Gnatia

Fates on vases, ii. 84

_Favissae_ (rubbish-heaps of temples), i. 345;
  and see i. 138

Fayûm, pottery from, i. 67;
  terracotta coin-moulds from, i. 106, ii. 391

Feather-brush or pen, use of, in vase-painting, i. 227 ff.

Fecunditas, ii. 384, 386

_Felicitas_ on lamps, ii. 398, 413

Felixstowe, vases from, ii. 440, 529

Fibulae, Boeotian, compared with vases, i. 289

_Fictiliarius_, ii. 511

_Fidelia_, ii. 465

_Figlinae_ of tile-makers, ii. 356

Figure-subjects, introduced on Greek vases, i. 281 ff., 314 ff.;
  in Etruria, ii. 291 ff.;
  on Arretine ware, ii. 492;
  on Gaulish pottery, ii. 506, 507, 514, 521, 527;
  at Castor, 544

“Fikellura” or Samian ware, i. 336 ff.;
  at Daphnae, i. 338, 352

“Fine” style of R.F. vases, i. 421, 440 ff.

Fink on Roman lamps, ii. 400, 428

Fish-plates, i. 194, 487, ii. 186

Flange-tiles, ii. 341, 342

Floral patterns on Corinthian vases, i. 312;
  and see Lotos, Palmette, Rosette

Flue-tiles, ii. 346 ff.

Flute-players on vases, ii. 169

Foreshortening, i. 398

Forgeries of vases, i. 40 ff.

Forms of vases, see Shapes

Fortis, potter, ii. 423 ff., 477

Fortune on money-boxes, ii. 390;
  on lamps, ii. 413

_Fossa_-tombs in Etruria, ii. 289 ff.

Fox and Crow, fable of, ii. 416

France, vase-collections of, i. 27;
  pottery-finds in, Chapter XXIII. _passim_;
  terracottas from, ii. 379 ff.;
  coin-moulds from, ii. 390 ff.;
  clay of, ii. 434;
  kilns in, ii. 443, 451 ff.;
  potters’ stamps in, ii. 503;
  and see Gaul

François vase, i. 73, 149, 370, ii. 10, 11;
  inscriptions on, ii. 257, 270

“Free” style at Lezoux, ii. 506, 521, 527

Friezes of animals on Corinthian vases, i. 313 ff., ii. 207;
  on Ionian, i. 331;
  general treatment of, ii. 207 ff.

Funeral lekythi, i. 142, 458 ff., ii. 157; masks, i. 123;
  imitated in Etruria, ii. 305;
  scenes on Apulian vases, i. 476, ii. 158;
  on Dipylon, i. 285, ii. 157;
  in general, ii. 156 ff.;
  uses of vases, i. 141 ff.;
  of lamps, ii. 397;
  of Roman pottery, ii. 456, 550

Furies, ii. 69, 138, 192

Furnaces, see Kilns

Furtwaengler on forgeries, i. 43;
  on Mycenaean vases, i. 270;
  on Boeotian, i. 286;
  on the Aristonoös vase, i. 298


Gaia, ?????t??f??, ii. 30, 73;
  type of, in terracotta figures, i. 122 ff.;
  rising from earth, ii. 73, and see 193;
  see also Pandora

Gamedes, potter, i. 300

Games on vases, ii. 167;
  of children, i. 137, 418, 449, ii. 167

Ganymede, ii. 18

Gaul, enamelled ware from, i. 129;
  terracottas from, ii. 379 ff.;
  as centre of lamp-fabric, ii. 427;
  moulds and stamps from, ii. 439 ff.;
  kilns in, ii. 443, 451 ff.;
  as centre for provincial pottery, ii. 498, 503, 515 ff.;
  subjects on pottery of, ii. 507;
  use of barbotine in, ii. 513, 529;
  doubtful pottery-centres in, ii. 533;
  pottery from, in Britain, ii. 522, 540, 542;
  plain wares of, ii. 548 ff.;
  duration of potteries in, ii. 432, 503, 526;
  and see France

Gaulish inscriptions on pottery, ii. 504;
  potters represented in art, ii. 511;
  potters’ names and stamps, ii. 461, 504, 509, 522, 527

?e?s??, i. 96

Gela, tombs at, i. 37;
  vases from, i. 86, 196;
  treasury of, at Olympia, i. 100

Gems compared with R.F. vases, i. 426

_Genre_ subjects in terracotta, i. 124;
  miscellaneous on vases, ii. 184;
  transformed into mythological, i. 318, cf. ii. 5

Geographical distribution of Greek vases, i. 32;
  of Roman, ii. 432, 495, 498;
  personifications, ii. 81 ff.

Geometrical pottery in Greece, i. 277 ff.;
  description of, i. 281 ff.;
  in Thera, i. 56;
  in Cyprus, i. 239, 247, 253 ff.;
  in Boeotia, i. 286 ff.;
  influence of, at Athens, i. 294, 298;
  in Boeotia, i. 300;
  in Melos, i. 302;
  at Corinth, i. 306, 308;
  at Daphnae, i. 351;
  in Etruria, ii. 289 ff.;
  in Southern Italy, ii. 325, 327, 328;
  ornamentation of, ii. 202 ff., 232;
  and see Dipylon

Geras, ii. 84

Gerhard on chronology of vases, i. 23;
  on varieties of amphorae, i. 160

Germany, vase-collections in, i. 28;
  inscribed tiles from, ii. 357, 364;
  terracottas from, ii. 383;
  duration of Roman pottery in, ii. 432;
  moulds and stamps from, ii. 439 ff.;
  kilns in, ii. 444, 453;
  early Roman pottery in, ii. 501 ff.;
  description of fabrics and pottery-centres, ii. 504, 533 ff.;
  classification, ii. 536;
  potters’ names, ii. 509 ff., 535;
  barbotine decoration, ii. 513, 514, 536;
  inscribed pottery, ii. 537;
  plain black wares, ii. 552

Geryon, i. 322, 432, ii. 98, 195

Giants, types of, ii. 195

Giganlomachia, ii. 12 ff.

Gilding of terracottas, i. 117;
  of vases, i. 201, 210, 231, 449, 498

Girgenti (Agrigentum), vases from, i. 86, 87;
  moulds from. i. 115

Gladiators on lamps, ii. 416, 421;
  on Roman pottery, ii. 507, 532, 544

Glass, enamels, i. 8, cf. 127 ff.;
  imitations of, in pottery, i. 64, 130, ii. 443, 514, 524

Glaukon ?a???, i. 403, 432, ii. 153, 267

Glaukos and Polyeidos, ii. 141

Glaukytes, potter, i. 232, 374, 379, 384

Glaze on terracottas, i. 8, 118, 128 ff.;
  on Greek vases, i. 203 ff.;
  on Roman pottery, ii. 435 ff.;
  analyses of, ii. 436;
  on provincial wares, ii. 497;
  on Castor ware, ii. 545

Gnatia or Gnathia (Egnazia, Fasano), vases of, i. 85, 226, 487, 488

Gordion, pottery from, i. 64

Gorgasos and Damophilos, ii. 372

Gorgoneion in interior of kylikes, i. 374, 400, 427

Gorgons, ii. 112, 146, 196

Graces (Charites), ii. 84

Graeco-Phoenician tombs in Cyprus, i. 35;
  pottery, i. 66, 247 ff., 251 ff.;
  sites where found, i. 250

Graeven on Roman money-boxes, ii. 388 ff.

_Graffiti_ on vases at Graufesenque, ii. 510;
  and see Inscriptions

Graufesenque potteries, ii. 504, 515 ff.;
  ornamentation, ii. 506, 520;
  _graffiti_ on, ii. 510;
  forms and decoration, ii. 519;
  potters, ii. 522

Greece, introduction of potter’s wheel in, i. 7, 206;
  earliest pottery of, i. 9, 10, 277 ff.;
  collections of vases in, i. 30;
  tombs in, i. 33;
  finds of pottery in, i. 46 ff.;
  _terra sigillata_ in, ii. 476, 498

Greek colonies, i. 60, 80;
  islands, finds in, i. 54 ff.;
  early pottery of, i. 9, 262 ff.;
  religion, i. 13, 138 ff., ii. 154 ff.;
  and see Pottery, Vases

Greeks and Persians, combats of, ii. 151, 179

Grey Roman wares, ii. 550

Ground-ornaments on Corinthian vases, i. 312, 320, ii. 231, 233;
  on Ionic, i. 334, ii. 233

Gryphons, ii. 148, 196;
  heads of, on Etruscan pottery, ii. 300

Gsell, excavations of, at Vulci, i. 77, ii. 280, 291

Guildhall Museum, ii. 359, 379

_Guilloche_ pattern, ii. 219

???a?????t??, scenes in, ii. 173

Gutter-tiles, i. 97, ii. 341;
  at Pompeii, ii. 343 ff.

_Guttus_, i. 200, 211, 503, ii. 469

Gypsum, figures of, i. 111


Hades, ii. 28, 67, 190;
  and see Underworld

Hadria, vases from, i. 71;
  and see ii. 477

Hair, treatment of, on vases, i. 407, ii. 201

Halikarnassos, finds at, i. 105, 106

Hamilton, Sir W., i. 17, 43

Hampshire, pottery from, see New Forest

Hancarville (D’), i. 17, 22

Handles of vases, i. 208, ii. 443;
  of wine-amphorae, stamped, i. 155 ff.

Hare-hunts, ii. 165

Harmodios and Aristogeiton, ii. 150

Harpies, ii. 72, 146, 196

Hartlip, use of tiles in villa at, ii. 348;
  vase from, ii. 508

Hartwig on the feather-pen, i. 227;
  on R.F. cup-painting, i. 398, 424 ff.;
  on ?a???-names, i. 404

Hasta (Asti) as pottery-centre, i. 71, ii. 477

Hathor, i. 254

Haverfield on Castor kilns, ii. 448;
  on Roman pottery, ii. 536, 541, 544, 546

Hebe, ii. 77, 84, 193

Hector, ii. 126 ff.

Heddernheim, kilns at, ii. 444

Hegesiboulos, potter, i. 445

Hegias, vase-painter, i. 421, 444

Heiligenberg, kilns at, ii. 444, 446, 449

Hekate, ii. 71, 190

Helen, ii. 119, 123, 135

Helios on vases, ii. 78, 103, 193, 483;
  on lamps, ii. 412;
  as Rhodian amphora-stamp, i. 156

Helioserapis lamp, ii. 403;
  and see i. 209, 216

Hellas personified, ii. 81

Hellenic pottery, of Cyprus, i. 237, 250, 253, 255;
  influence of Mycenaean on, i. 276

Hellenistic art, influence of, on Arretine ware, ii. 489, 494;
  on Gaulish pottery, ii. 507;
  on Gaulish terracottas, ii. 386;
  porcelain vases, i. 128;
  pottery of Cyprus, i. 256;
  terracottas, i. 125

Hemera, ii. 78, 79

?µ???t?????, i. 135, 183, ii. 241

?µ?t?µ??, i. 174

Hephaistos on vases, ii. 36, 190;
  in Gigantomachia, ii. 14, 15;
  at birth of Athena, ii. 15;
  return of, to Olympos, ii. 17;
  smithy of, ii. 37, 130, 171

Hera on vases, ii. 16, 21, 188;
  and see Juno Lanuvina

Heraion at Argos, i. 52, 278, 298, 307;
  at Olympia, i. 92 ff., 97, 100

Herakles on vases, generally, ii. 94 ff.;
  how represented, ii. 194;
  on Corinthian vases, i. 314, 318;
  on Chalcidian, i. 322;
  on Assteas vase, i. 479;
  with Apollo, ii. 33;
  with Athena, ii. 38, 105;
  on mural reliefs, ii. 370;
  on lamps, ii. 413;
  on Gaulish pottery, ii. 508, 531, 545;
  skyphos of, i. 185;
  Erotes with club of, ii. 411

Heraldic groups on vases, i. 318, ii. 207

Heralds, ii. 177, 198

Hermaios, potter, i. 420, 424

Hermes in terracottas, i. 114, 126;
  on vases, ii. 50 ff., 190;
  ?????????, i. 325, 326, ii. 260;
  on lamps, ii. 409

Hermione, vases from, i. 52

Hermogenes, potter, i. 374, 379, 383

Hermonax, vase-painter, i. 421, 446

Herodotos on origin of Etruscans, ii. 281

Heroic subjects on mural reliefs, ii. 370;
  on lamps, ii. 414

Heroön, i. 476, ii. 158, 159

????, worship of, i. 477

Hesiod and vase-paintings, ii. 6

Hesperides, ii. 92;
  garden of, ii. 75, 99

Hestia on vases, ii. 53, 190

_Hiérarchie des genres_, law of, i. 245, 284, 315, 332

Hieroduli, ii. 492, 493

Hieron, potter, i. 421, 436, ii. 238, 259

Hilinos, potter, i. 421, 429

Himera, vases from, i. 87

Himeros, ii. 49

Hippalektryon, ii. 149

Hipparchos ?a???, i. 403

Hippolyta, ii. 99, 111

Hippolytos, ii. 112

Hischylos, potter, i. 379, 420, 422, 424

Hissarlik, see Troy

Historical methods of study, i. 22, 235;
  limits of subject, i. 31, ii. 430 ff.;
  subjects and personages on vases, i. 403, ii. 149 ff., 266, 267;
  on lamps, ii. 415

History illustrated by vases, i. 11;
  in connection with R.F. vases, i. 402 ff., 463

Hölder on Roman pottery, ii. 460, 472, 537

Hogarth on Cretan pottery, i. 267

???e???, i. 175

Holland, collections in, i. 28;
  pottery from, ii. 522, 539;
  inscribed tiles from, ii. 358, 361, 365

??µ??, i. 176

Homer, references to vases in, i. 89, 132, 145, 148, 168, 172, 174,
   180, 192;
  to potter’s wheel in, i. 207;
  on Cretan ethnography, i. 264;
  subjects from, on vases, i. 335, 499, ii. 3 ff., 126 ff.

Homeric bowls, i. 134, 185, 499, ii. 2

Hopkinson on Melian vases, i. 302

?p??t?d??µ?a, ii. 164

Hoppin on Euthymides, i. 428

Horace quoted, ii. 460, 463, 464, 469

Horae, ii. 84;
  and see Seasons

_Horror vacui_, i. 283, 313

Horse-race, ii. 164

—— taming, ii. 166

Horsemen, ii. 166

Human figures, introduction of, on Greek vases, i. 281 ff., 314 ff.

Hungary, inscribed tiles from, ii. 359

Hunters on vases, ii. 165, 197;
  on Gaulish pottery, ii. 507, 527;
  on Castor ware, ii. 544

Hut-urns in Italy, ii. 288

Hyades, ii. 81, 193

Hybla Heraea, vases from, i. 88

Hydra, ii. 98

Hydria, i. 165 ff., 372 ff., 411

Hydrophoria, ii. 173

Hygiainon, painter, i. 396

Hygieia, ii. 76, 84

Hypnos, ii. 71, 84, 193, and see 158

Hypocausts, i. 103, ii. 332, 342, 346 ff.

Hypsis, vase-painter, i. 421, 429.


Iacchos, ii. 27

Ialysos, vases from, i. 58, 152, 270

Iapygians, i. 172, ii. 323, 325;
  pottery of, ii. 323 ff.

Iapys, eponymous hero, ii. 327

Ikarios (?), ii. 139, and see 369

Ikaros on lamp, ii. 414;
  with Daidalos on vase, ii. 141

_Iliad_ and vases, ii. 4;
  scenes from, ii. 126 ff.

????? ???s??, ii. 5, 133 ff.

Illuminations, use of lamps in, ii. 396

_Imbrex_, i. 96, ii. 341 ff.

Imbrications, i. 311, 331, ii. 219

Imitations of vases (modern), i. 40 ff.

_Impasto Italico_, ii. 285, 290, 295, 300

Incense-burner, i. 140

Incised lines, i. 311, 313, 314, 331;
  inscriptions, ii. 237 ff., 271 ff., 359, and see Graffiti,
     Inscriptions;
  decoration on provincial wares, ii. 505, 515

Indented patterns on provincial wares, ii. 514, 544

Individualities personified, ii. 91

_Infundibulum_ of lamp, ii. 394

Inghirami, i. 18, 42

Inhumation, i. 145, ii. 284

Inscriptions on tiles, i. 101, ii. 348, 351 ff., 357, 358;
  chronology of, ii. 360 ff.;
  on lamps, i. 107, 108, ii. 420 ff.;
  on vases, i. 149, ii. 236 ff.;
  incised, ii. 237 ff.;
  painted, ii. 243 ff.;
  palaeography of, ii. 246 ff., 268 ff.;
  Corinthian, i. 315 ff., ii. 250 ff.;
  “Corintho-Attic,” i. 325;
  Ionic, i. 336, 357, ii. 252;
  Cyrenaic, i. 344, ii. 250;
  Naucratite, i. 345;
  Attic, i. 378, 402, 418, 422, ii. 255 ff.;
  Boeotian, ii. 252;
  Chalcidian, ii. 253;
  South Italian, ii. 271 ff.;
  ?a???-names, i. 403, ii. 265 ff.;
  artists’ signatures, ii. 257 ff.;
  explanatory on Attic vases, ii. 259 ff.;
  exclamatory, ii. 261 ff.;
  convivial, ii. 265, 524, 538;
  under feet of vases (names and prices), ii. 239 ff.;
  on Etruscan vases, ii. 310 ff.;
  on terracotta moulds, ii. 382;
  on Arretine vases, ii. 480 ff.;
  on Gaulish pottery, ii. 504, 512, 517, 531;
  and see Graffiti, Signatures, Stamps

Interpretation of subjects on vases, i. 21, ii. 8

Ionia, art of, i. 329, 332, 361;
  pottery of, i. 62, 224, 328 ff.;
  various fabrics of, i. 330;
  influence of Mycenaean civilisation on, i. 277, 329 ff.;
  of Oriental art, i. 331 ff.;
  influence of, on Attic vases, i. 294, 295, 300, 370, 374, 382, 385,
     388;
  on Etruria, ii. 296, 299, 308, 317, 320;
  use of incised lines in, i. 314;
  B.F. fabrics in, i. 353 ff.;
  arrangement of subjects on vases, ii. 206;
  ornamentation, ii. 212 ff., 233;
  early painting of, i. 361 ff.

Ionian islands, pottery from, i. 54;
  and see Corfu

Ionic alphabet, ii. 246, 253, 271;
  inscriptions, i. 357, ii. 252;
  pottery in Egypt, i. 68, 345 ff.;
  type of kylix, i. 357, 374

Iphigeneia, ii. 35, 124, 138

Iris, ii. 76, 128, 193

Ischia, vases from, i. 88

Isidorus on Roman pottery, ii. 464, 469, 475

Isis on lamps, ii. 412;
  lamps used in worship of, ii. 403

Isola Farnese, see Veii

“Isolating” method of representation on vases, ii. 10.

“Italian Megarian ” bowls, ii. 490

Italy, vases found in, i. 22, 69 ff.;
  collections in, i. 29;
  tombs, i. 37, ii. 284 ff.;
  porcelain and enamelled wares from, i. 128, 129;
  Corinthian vases in, i. 305 ff., 318, ii. 294 ff.;
  imitations of Ionic pottery in, i. 358, ii. 308;
  modelled vases in, i. 494;
  relief-wares in, i. 496, 498, 501 ff., and see Etruscan, Roman;
  early civilisation of, ii. 280 ff., and see Etruria;
  terracotta architecture in, i. 98, 101, ii. 315 ff.;
  sculpture, ii. 313, 371 ff.;
  centres of lamp-manufacture in, ii. 427;
  pottery-kilns, ii. 443, 451;
  centres for Roman pottery, ii. 475 ff.;
  end of _terra sigillata_ in, ii. 495;
  transition to provincial fabrics in, ii. 500, 515 ff.;
  Gaulish pottery found in, ii. 498, 522, 524, 526

—— Southern, tombs in, i. 37;
  vases found in, i. 79 ff.;
  R.F. vase-painting in, i. 465 ff.;
  fabrics of, i. 479 ff.;
  end of vase-painting in, i. 487 ff.;
  plastic and moulded vases in, i. 494, 498, 502;
  local pottery of, ii. 323 ff.

Italynski, i. 21

Ivy-leaf patterns, ii. 221

Ixion, ii. 69


Jahn on vases, i. 20, 23, 150

Jars used in architecture, ii. 457

Jason, ii. 115

Jatta collection, i. 26, 29

Javelin-throwing, ii. 163

Jewellery on vases, ii. 202

Joubin on Clazomenae sarcophagi, i. 364

Judgment of Paris, ii. 121 ff.

Juggler on lamps, ii. 418

Jugs, see Oinochoë, Olpe

Jumping on vases, ii. 163

Juno Lanuvina, ii. 22, 103

Jupiter, Capitoline, i. 116, ii. 314, 371, 372;
  and see Zeus

Juvenal quoted on Roman pottery, ii. 455 ff.


Kabeiri, ii. 74;
  vases from temple of, i. 52, 391, ii. 159

Kadmos, ii. 117

??d??, i. 165;
  and see _Cadus_

Kaineus, ii. 145

Kalais, see Boreades

Kalliades, potter, i. 411, 434, 493

?a???-names, i. 379, 402 ff., ii. 265 ff.;
  list of, ii. 277

???p??, i. 166

?a??pt??, i. 96

Kalymnos, vases from, i. 58

Kamaraes, vases from, i. 59;
  fabric so called, i. 264 ff.

Kamarina, vases from, i. 87

Kameiros, tombs at, i. 34.;
  vases from i. 59, 127;
  terracottas from, see Rhodes

???aß?? i. 111, 209

Kanake, ii. 141

????aß??, i. 152

Kantharos, i. 187, 410

?a???s???, i. 188

Karlsruhe, vase-collection at, i. 28

Karo on “affected” vases, i. 387

Karpathos, tombs in, i. 34;
  pottery from, i. 58

Karystos, vase from, i. 55

Kassandra, ii. 134

Kastor, see Dioskuri

Keel-hauling, ii. 178

Kekrops, ii. 139

?e??ß?, i. 169

????te?, ii. 164

Keos, fabric of, i. 56, 357, ii. 253

Kephalos, ii. 80, 140

??? ?a??t???, ii. 72, 100

Kerameikos, i. 46, 89, 92, 231, 280

?e??µ?de? ?e??t??efa???, i. 97

?e??µ???, i. 136

???aµ??, i. 89, 100, ii. 455

Kerberos, ii. 70, 99

Kerkyon, ii. 109

?????? or ???????, i. 195, 201

Kertch, vases from, i. 32, 60, 447, 451, 464, 497;
  tiles from, i. 101;
  wine-amphorae from, i. 158

Keryneian stag, ii. 97

??ß?????, see Ciborium

Kilns for Roman pottery, existing remains of, ii. 443 ff.;
  detailed list of, ii. 451 ff.;
  representations of, see i. 215 ff.

Kimon, painter, i. 320, 397, 398, 408, 430, 455

—— statesman, i. 418

Kings, how represented on vases, ii. 97

Kirke, ii. 136

??ss?ß???, i. 180

Kitharoidos, see Apollo

Kittos, potter, i. 379, 391

Klagenfurt, vase from, ii. 517

Kleanthes, painter, i. 320, 395, 396

Klein on R. F. cup-painting, i. 424 ff.;
  on signatures of artists, ii. 257;
  on ?a???-names, ii. 266

Kleisophos, vase-painter, i. 384

Kleonae, vases from, i. 52

???ßa???, i. 105

Klitias, vase-painter, i. 370, 379, ii. 257

Klytaemnestra, ii. 137, 138

Knidos, pottery from, i. 64, 330;
  lamps from, i. 108, ii. 397, 418, 423, 427;
  amphora-handles from, i. 157

Knossos, excavations at, i. 60, 152, 265 ff.

Knuckle-bone players, i. 125

Kodros, ii. 140

Koenen on German pottery, ii. 536

Kolchos, potter, i. 379

Kolias, Cape, i. 46, 49, 205, 370

??µ??, ii. 182

Kopenhagen, vases at, i. 28, 286

???a?, i. 112 ff.

???????a, i. 139

????p????? or ????p?asta?, i. 112

Kos, pottery from, i. 58, 129;
  and see ii. 476

?????, i. 140, 187

Kottabos, i. 188, ii. 167, 181

??t???s???, i. 184, 195

Kotyle, i. 135, 183, 212, 217

?????t??f?? types in terracottas, i. 123, ii. 386;
  on vases, ii. 30, 73;
  and see Gaia

Kramer’s classification of vases, i. 22

Krater, i. 167 ff., 411, 468, 482;
  local South Italian, ii. 326;
  Arretine, ii. 488, 501, 520;
  and see ii. 464

Krause on shapes of vases, i. 150

Kreon, ii. 119

Kreousa and Ion, ii. 140

Krete, see Crete

Kretschmer on vase-inscriptions, ii. 237 ff.

Kroisos, brick used by, i. 91, 94;
  represented on vase, ii. 6, 150

Kroker on Geometrical vases, i. 281

Krommyon, ii. 82, 109

Kronos, ii. 73

???ss??, i. 167

??µß???, i. 186

??µ???d????, i. 194

??pe????, i. 180

Kyathos, i. 179

Kybele, ii. 74

Kyklopes, i. 105, ii. 37, 171;
  and see Polyphemos

Kyknos, ii. 101

Kylix, i. 188 ff.;
  early types, i. 272, 287, 313, 341;
  Athenian, i. 373, 400, 409, 422 ff., 457;
  compared with _calix_, ii. 468

Kymation, i. 97;
  as pattern on vases, ii. 218

Kyme, vases from, i. 62, 356

Kypselos, chest of, i. 315, 319, 320, 378, ii. 236

Kyrene, goddess, i. 124, 343, ii. 31, 81, 82;
  and see Cyrenaica

Kythera, vases from, i. 54, 315


Laconia, vases from, i. 52

Laertes and Antikleia (?), ii. 137

Lagena, ii. 466

???????, i. 165

Lamia, ii. 149

?aµpad?d??µ?a, ii. 164

Lamps, Greek, i. 106 ff.;
  Roman, ii. 393 ff.;
  uses, 395 ff.;
  forms, 399 ff.;
  subjects, 406 ff.;
  inscriptions, 420 ff.

Landscape on vases, i. 409, 470, ii. 204, 205;
  in scenes on lamps, ii. 418

_Lanx_, ii. 468

Laokoön, ii. 134

_Lararia_, ii. 375

Lares on lamps, ii. 413

Larisa in Asia Minor, pottery from, i. 62, 339

Larnaka, vases from, i. 66

????a?, see _Ossuaria_

Lasimos, vase-painter, i. 478, ii. 272

“Late fine” style, i. 421, 448 ff.

_Laterariae_, i. 91, ii. 331

_Lateres_, ii. 331, 335

Latin inscriptions on vases, i. 485, 490;
  literature, references to, see Literature

Latium, vases from, i. 79

Laurel-wreaths, ii. 223

Lead used for glaze, i. 130;
  vases repaired with, i. 147

Leaf-patterns on vases, ii. 221 ff.

Leagros ?a???, i. 403, 425, 430, ii. 152, 267

Leather, imitations of, i. 242, 243

Lebes, i. 146, 174;
  ?aµ????, i. 199;
  and see Burgon

Lecce, vases from, i. 86

Leda, ii. 19, 120, 508

Legions, stamps of, on tiles, ii. 351, 363

Lekane, i. 146, 164, 176, 469

?e?a??µa?te?a, i. 177

Lekythos, i. 195;
  B.F., i. 376;
  R.F., i. 412;
  white-ground, i. 48, 132, 143, 224, 456 ff., ii. 157

Lemnos personified, ii. 82

Lenormant on Iapygian pottery, ii. 327

Lentini, vases from, i. 86

?epast?, i. 165, 469;
  and see ii. 471

Lesbos, vases from, i. 57;
  fabrics of, i. 339, 347

Leto, ii. 30, 31

?e???µa, i. 397, 454, ii. 320

Lezoux, potteries of, ii. 504, 525 ff.;
  kilns at, ii. 525;
  potter’s wheel from, ii. 438;
  stamps from, ii. 440;
  moulds from, ii. 441;
  forms of vases at, ii. 501, 526;
  ornamentation, ii. 506, 527;
  enamelled ware from, i. 130;
  incised vases, ii. 443, 515;
  barbotine decoration, ii. 513;
  other fabrics, ii. 528 ff.;
  termination of potteries, ii. 432, 526

Libation-bowls, i. 140, 192, ii. 471;
  see Patera, Phiale

Libation-scenes, i. 140, ii. 18, 31, 86 ff., 155

Libertus, potter, ii. 439, 521, 527, 542

Lincoln, vases from, ii. 546, 549

_Liniare_, i. 396

Lion’s head spouts, vases with, ii. 530, 541

Lipari Islands, vases from, i. 88

Liquids, vases used for, i. 150 ff.

Literature, classical, and vases, i. 13, 132, ii. 1 ff.;
  Roman pottery in, ii. 455, 475 ff.;
  names of vases in, i. 148 ff., ii. 458 ff.;
  lamps in, i. 107, ii. 395 ff.;
  terracottas in, i. 110, ii. 371 ff.;
  subjects from, on lamps, ii. 415

Litlington, vases in tombs at, ii. 351, 456

Locri, vases from, i. 86;
  terracotta reliefs from, i. 120;
  white lekythi from, i. 458

_Loculi_, ii. 388

Loeschcke on “Corintho-Attic” vases, i. 324

Lokris, vases from, i. 53

London, tiles found in, ii. 348, 359, 363;
  kilns found in, ii. 444;
  pottery from, ii. 503, 529, 540;
  and see British Museum

Lotos-ornament in Cyprus, i. 249, ii. 224;
  in Boeotia, i. 288;
  general history of, ii. 223 ff.

???t?????, i. 176

???t??f????, i. 142

Louvre Museum, i. 25, 27

Love-scenes on vases, ii. 183

Lucania, vases from, i. 83, 144, 172;
  style of, i. 481;
  local pottery of, ii. 324, 328

??????, i. 107

Luckenbach on connection of vases and literature, ii. 5 ff.

Luni, terracotta sculpture from, ii. 318

Luynes, Duc de, i. 18, 22

Lycia, pottery from, i. 64

Lydian origin of Etruscans, ii. 281

Lykaon, ii. 130

Lykourgos, ii. 56, 141

Lyre-players, ii. 169

Lyric poetry and vases, ii. 6

Lyssa, ii. 91, 194


Mackenzie on Cretan pottery, i. 265 ff.

Macmillan lekythos, i. 309

Macrobius on the _Sigillaria_, ii. 376

Maeander-pattern, ii. 212 ff.;
  on R.F. vases, i. 415

Maenads on vases, ii. 55 ff., 192;
  names of, ii. 65;
  on lamps, ii. 411;
  on Arretine vases, ii. 492, 493

Mainz, inscribed vase from, ii. 539

Makron, vase-painter, i. 436

Malta, pottery from, i. 88

Mandrokles, painter, i. 361

Mania, ii. 91

Marathon, vases from, i. 49;
  tile from, i. 99;
  bull of, ii. 109

“Marbled” vases, ii. 523

Marine subjects (Mycenaean), i. 272, ii. 185;
  and see Sea-Deities

Marion, see Poli

Marne, Department of, incised pottery from, ii. 515

Marriage-scenes on vases, ii. 16, 36, 172

Marseilles, pottery found at, i. 69

Marsyas, ii. 32

Martha on Etruscan art, ii. 322

Martial quoted, ii. 376, 395, 463, 469, 478, 479

Marzabotto, terracotta pipes from, ii. 350

Masks of terracotta, i. 104, 105, 123, ii. 377;
  imitation of, in Canopic jars, ii. 305;
  use of, for gutter-tiles, ii. 344

µast??, i. 186

_Matt_ colour, i. 246

Maurion, potter, i. 445

Mayer on local Apulian pottery, ii. 323 ff.

_Mazonomum_, ii. 469

Measures, vases used as, i. 135, ii. 460, 463, 472

Medallions on Gaulish vases, ii. 441, 530 ff.

Medeia, ii. 116

Medusa, see Gorgon

Megakles ?a???, i. 428

—— potter, i. 445

—— statesman, i. 12, 103

Megalopolis, pottery from, i. 52

Megara, vases from, i. 53;
  statue of Zeus at, i. 92, 111;
  temple at, i. 94

Megarian bowls, i. 53, 134, 185, 499, ii. 2;
  as prototypes of Roman pottery, ii. 475, 489;
  treasury at Olympia, i. 100

Meidias, potter, i. 446

Melampus and Proitos, ii. 141

Meleager, ii. 114

Melian reliefs, i. 120;
  amphorae, i. 301;
  their ornamentation, ii. 232

Melos, vases from, i. 57, 262;
  and see Melian

Memnon, ii. 132

—— ?a???, i. 425

Menaidas, potter, i. 52, 301

Mending of vases, i. 39, 147

Menekrates, tomb of, i. 54

Menelaos, ii. 129, 135

Menidi, pottery from, i. 49, 273

Merope, ii. 141

Messapians on vases, ii. 151;
  pottery of, ii. 323 ff.

Metal vases, i. 131 ff., 201, ii. 2;
  use of, in Etruria, ii. 307;
  at Rome, ii. 433;
  imitations of, in Greece, i. 385, 495 ff.;
  in Etruria, ii. 303, 307;
  in Italy and Gaul, ii. 489, 528, 529, 552

Metaphysical ideas personified, ii. 90

Metapontum, vases from, i. 85;
  tile from, i. 97

Metope style of decoration, i. 282, 378, ii. 208

Metopes of terracotta painted, i. 92

Mevania as pottery-centre, ii. 475, 490

Midas, ii. 144

Mikon, painter, i. 442

Milani on Canopic jars, ii. 304

Miletos as pottery-centre, i. 329, 336, 338

Military subjects on vases, ii. 175 ff.;
  on lamps, ii. 417;
  uses of bricks and tiles, ii. 332, 336, 363 ff.

Millin, i. 17

Millingen, i. 22, ii. 9

Milonidas, vase-painter, i. 315, 317

Miltiades ?a???, i. 403, ii. 267

µ??t??, i. 231;
  and see _Minium_, _Rubrica_

Mining, representations of, ii. 170

_Minium_, i. 118, 231;
  and see ii. 314

Minoan pottery, see Crete

Minor Artists, i. 374, 379, 383

Minos, ii. 144;
  thalassocracy of, i. 264

Minotaur, ii. 109, 148

Mirrors, Etruscan, compared with vases, ii. 307

“Mixed” technique, Ionic, i. 331, 334, 346;
  B.F. and R.F., i. 379, 386, 401

Modelling, of vases, i. 208 ff., 492 ff.;
  in clay, i. 6, 110, 114, ii. 372, 375, 378

Modena, see Mutina

Moirae, ii. 84

Mommo, potter, ii. 522

Money-boxes, ii. 388 ff.

Monochrome painting, i. 395

Montans, pottery of, ii. 525

_Moretum_ quoted, ii. 395

_Morra_, game of, ii. 167

_Mortarium_, ii. 470, 550;
  and see 530, 541

Mother-Goddess, ii. 386; and see ?????t??f??

Moulds, i. 105, 111, ii. 388;
  for coins, i. 106, ii. 390 ff.;
  for terracottas, i. 114, ii. 381;
  for bricks, ii. 333;
  for lamps, ii. 405;
  Arretine, ii. 488, 494;
  use of, in Roman pottery, ii. 438, 440

Moulins, manufacture of terracottas at, ii. 379 ff.

Mourners, i. 285, 460, 476, ii. 157, 158

Munich, collection at, i. 26, 28

Mural reliefs (Roman), ii. 365 ff.;
  compared with Arretine ware, ii. 439, 493

Murray on Clazomenae sarcophagus, i. 363;
  on R.F. painters, i. 423 ff.;
  on white-ground vases, i. 458, 461

Muses, ii. 83

Museums, i. 23 ff.;
  list of, i. 27 ff.

Musicians, ii. 168, 182, 197

Mutina (Modena), vases found at, i. 71, ii. 495;
  as centre for lamps, ii. 401, 427;
  for vases, ii. 477

µ???? (_myxus_), i. 107, ii. 395

Mycenae, tombs at, i. 33;
  pottery from, i. 51

Mycenaean pottery, i. 269 ff.;
  shapes, i. 168, 181, 190, 271;
  subjects and ornamentation, i. 272, 276, ii. 185, 206, 232;
  in Rhodes, i. 58;
  in Crete, i. 59, 265 ff.;
  in Cyprus, i. 237, 239, 244 ff.;
  imitations of, i. 246, 280;
  influence of, on later pottery:
    Geometrical, i. 277 ff.;
    Proto-Attic, i. 294;
    Phaleron ware, i., 299;
    Melian, i. 302;
    Ionian, i. 329 ff., 338, 352;
    in Southern Italy, ii. 324, 325

Mylasa, pottery from, i. 64, 340

Myres on Cypriote pottery, i. 240 ff.

Myrina, pottery from, i. 62, 339;
  terracottas, i. 125, 126

Myrtle-wreaths, ii. 223

Mysteries, see Eleusinian

Mythological subjects, introduced at Athens, i. 296;
  at Corinth, i. 314, 317 ff.;
  on R.F. vases, i. 416;
  on South Italian, i. 474;
  types in terracottas, i. 123 ff.;
  on B.F. vases, i. 376 ff.;
  on R.F., i. 419

Mythology on vases, i. 12, 13, ii. 3


Naples, Museum of, i. 24, 26, 29, 80, 483, and see i. 45;
  vases found at, i. 80;
  imitations made at, i. 41, 42

Narce, early settlement at, ii. 289

_Nasiterna_, ii. 465

Natural products personified, ii. 82

Naukratis, finds at, i. 68, 138, 338;
  local pottery of, i. 224, 345 ff.;
  other pottery at, i. 338, 341;
  connection with Etruria, ii. 298, 299

Nauplia, pottery from, i. 51

Nausikaa, ii. 136

Nautilus on vases, i. 272, ii. 185

Naval subjects, i. 285, 291, ii. 178

Nearchos, potter, i. 379, 383

Negroes on vases, ii. 179

Nemea personified, ii. 82

Nemean lion, ii. 95

Nemesis, ii. 91

Neolithic Age, i. 4, 5;
  pottery of, in Crete, i. 265, 267;
  remains in Etruria, ii. 283

Neoptolemos, ii. 133, 138

Neptune on Roman roof-tiles, ii. 345;
  and see Poseidon

Nereids, ii. 26, 130, 133

Nereus, ii. 25, 101, 189

Nestor, ii. 124;
  cup of, i. 148, 172, ii. 2

Nether World, see Under-world

Netherlands, Roman pottery from, ii. 539

Network patterns, ii. 215

?e???spast?, i. 121

“New Attic” reliefs, ii. 368, 407, 411, 439, 492, 493, 507

New Forest ware, ii. 547

—— Year lamps, ii. 398, 412, 420

—— York Museum, i. 26, 65

Newton, Sir Charles, i. 57, 58, 108

Nike (Victory) in terracottas, i. 125;
  on vases, i. 418, ii. 85 ff., 193;
  with Herakles, ii. 106;
  on Roman antefix, ii. 343;
  on mural reliefs, ii. 368, 369;
  on lamps, ii. 413

Nikias, potter, i. 446, ii. 259

Nikosthenes, potter, i. 170, 384, 393

Nile on vases, ii. 83;
  scenes on, in mural reliefs, ii. 371

Niobids, ii. 33

Nisyros, vases from, i. 58;
  as weapon of Poseidon, ii. 13

Nola, vases from, i. 82;
  varnish of, i. 42, 46

“Nolan” amphorae, i. 82, 162, 219, 405;
  imitations of, i. 484

Norfolk, kilns found in, ii. 445, 449

Normandy, terracottas from, ii. 384

Northamptonshire, kilns found in, ii. 444, 543;
  and see Castor

??st??, ii. 5, 135

Nozzles of lamps, ii. 395;
  as basis of classification, ii. 399 ff.

Numa, pottery in use under, ii. 304, 455, 476, 477

Nursing-Mother type, see ?????t??f??

Nymphs, ii. 19, 31, 55, 82, 92, 143, 149

Nyx, ii. 79, 193


_Obba_, ii. 472

_Obrendarium_, ii. 456

Occupations represented on vases, ii. 169 ff.

Ocriculum as pottery-centre, ii. 475, 490

Oculist’s stamp on a vase, ii. 510

Odysseus on vases, ii. 128, 133, 136, 137;
  on lamps, ii. 414

_Odyssey_, subjects from, ii. 4, 135 ff.

Oedipus, ii. 117, 118

_Oenophorum_, ii. 464

_Officina_, meaning of, on tile-stamps, ii. 356, 362;
  use of, in Roman potters’ stamps, ii. 461, 486, 509, 528, 535

Oikopheles, potter, i. 297, 379, ii. 258

Oil, amphorae used for, i. 153 ff.;
  other vases used for, i. 195 ff.;
  making and selling of, on vases, ii. 171, 262

??????s??, i. 180

Oinochoë, i. 177, 334, 412, 469

Oinomaos, ii. 113

Oinopion, ii. 58, 91

Oistros, ii. 91, 194

Okeanos, ii. 25

Olbia, vases from, i. 61;
  tiles from, i. 101;
  wine-amphorae from, i. 157, 158

_Olla_, ii. 389, 456, 457, 470, 529, 550

Olpe or olpis, i. 178;
  Corinthian, i. 311;
  used by Amasis, i. 382

Oltos, painter, i. 421, 429

Olympia, pottery found at, i. 52;
  terracotta architecture of, i. 92 ff.;
  personified, ii. 81;
  scenes at, on vases, ii. 113

Olympian deities on vases, Chap. XII. _passim_;
  on lamps, ii. 414

Olympos, scenes in, ii. 15 ff., 107

—— Mount, personified as Satyr, ii. 64, 83

Onesimos, vase-painter, i. 421, 422, 434

????, i. 199

Opaque painting on black ground, i. 226, 393, 485, 488 ff.

Oppius Restitutus, C., lamp maker, ii. 406, 425, 426

_Opus doliare_, ii. 330, 354, 361, 458

—— _mixtum_, ii. 337, 339

—— _reticulatum_, ii. 338

Orange, Gaulish medallions from, ii. 530 ff.

Orbetello, pottery from, i. 73

_Orbiculus_ on tile-stamps, ii. 353, 360

Orchomenos, pottery from, i. 53

_Orcio appulo_, ii. 325

Orestes and his story, ii. 137

Oria, vases from, i. 86

Oriental influence in Cyprus, i. 239, 247 ff.;
  in Attica, i. 295, 298;
  at Corinth, i. 311, 318;
  in Ionia, i. 331, 333, 334;
  in Etruria, ii. 292, 296, 299, 303, 304;
  motives on vases, ii. 206

Orientals on vases, ii. 178, 195, 199, 200

Ormidhia, vase from, i. 253

Ornamental patterns, origin of, ii. 210;
  rectilinear, ii. 211 ff.;
  curvilinear, ii. 216 ff.;
  vegetable and floral, ii. 220 ff.;
  treatment of, in different fabrics, ii. 232 ff.;
  Mycenaean, i. 276;
  Geometrical, i. 282;
  Boeotian, i. 288;
  Melian, i. 302;
  Corinthian, i. 312 ff.;
  Rhodian, i. 334;
  Naucratite, i. 348;
  Caeretan, i. 354;
  black-figured, i. 375;
  red-figured, i. 412;
  South Italian, i. 468;
  on Clazomenae sarcophagi, i. 365

Ornamentation of Roman pottery, how produced, ii. 438;
  of Gaulish wares, ii. 520, 521, 526;
  of barbotine wares, ii. 514, 544;
  incised or indented, ii. 514, 546

Orpheus, ii. 68, 143, 195

Orsi, discoveries of, in Crete, i. 264 ff., 272

Orthography of Attic vases, ii. 268 ff.

????st?d???, ii. 169, 197

Orvieto, vases from, i. 74;
  krater from, in Louvre, i. 409, 442, ii. 203;
  terracotta sculpture at, ii. 319

Oscan inscriptions, i. 103, 483, ii. 273

_Oscilla_, ii. 377

Osco-Samnites, i. 483, ii. 180, 200, 324

_Ossuaria_, i. 145, 272, ii. 285;
  and see Cinerary urn

Ostia, roof-tile from, ii. 345

Ostracism, i. 12, 103

?st?a???, ?st?a???? t??e?µata, i. 89

Oundle, vase from, ii. 541

Outline-drawing, i. 224, 320, 331, 334, 395, 455

Owl-vases from Troy, i. 258

Owners’ names on vases, ii. 241

Oxford, Ashmolean Museum, i. 27

????, i. 194, ii. 239

???ßaf??, i. 136, 171, 194, ii. 239


Paestum, vases from, i. 82;
  fabric of, i. 479;
  inscriptions on vases of, ii. 272

?a????t???, ii. 163

Painted vases, special uses of, i. 142 ff.;
  manufacture of, i. 202 ff.;
  classification, i. 219 ff.;
  earliest examples in Greece, i. 239, 243, 260, 265;
  in Etruria, ii. 293, 306 ff.;
  Roman, ii. 442;
  termination of, in Greece and Italy, i. 487 ff., ii. 310, 431;
  and see Vase-paintings, Vases

Painters of vases represented, i. 223, 227, 228

Painting, Greek, i. 14, 320, 394 ff., 440 ff., 450;
  Ionic, i. 361;
  influence of, on vases, i. 14, 320, 394 ff., 440 ff., 450, 455, 471,
     ii. 203;
  on terracotta, i. 92, 397, 454;
  Etruscan, on terracotta, ii. 299, 319

Palaeography of vase-inscriptions, ii. 245;
  of Attic inscriptions, ii. 268 ff.

Palaestra, scenes in, ii. 162 ff.

Palaimon, i. 314, ii. 26, 189

Palazzolo (Acrae), vases from, i. 87

Palladion, rape of, ii. 133

Palmette-pattern, ii. 224 ff.;
  on Boeotian Geometrical vases, i. 288;
  on B.F., i. 375;
  on R.F., i. 413 ff.

Pamphaios, potter, i. 379, 420, 422 ff., 427, ii. 259

Pan, ii. 58, 192

Panathenaic amphorae, i. 46, 69, 132, 145, 160, 389;
  inscriptions on, ii. 264, 270

?a?a???a???, i. 185, 410;
  and see Kotyle

Pandareos, ii. 141

Pandion, sons of, ii. 139

Pandora, ii. 75;
  “box” of, i. 152

Panels on vases, i. 160, 169, 221, 356, 369, 373, 375, ii. 208

Panofka, theories of, i. 21, 149

Pantheon at Rome, date of brickwork, ii. 338, 360

Panticapaeum, see Kertch

Papposeilenos, ii. 65, 192

Paris, son of Priam, ii. 121 ff., 127, 195;
  Judgment of, ii. 122

Paris, see Louvre

pa?????, i. 194, ii. 469

Paros, stamped amphora-handles from, i. 157;
  primitive pottery from, i. 262

Parrhasios, i. 450

Parthenon sculptures, and vase-paintings, i. 15, 450, 460, 464, 497;
  and lamps, ii. 409

Pasiades, potter, i. 379

Pasiteles, use of clay models by, i. 111, ii. 375

Passeri, theories of, i. 21;
  collection of lamps, ii. 408

Pastoral scenes on lamps, ii. 418;
  and see Tityrus

_Patella_, ii. 469

_Patera_, ii. 471;
  imitating metal, ii. 529;
  and see Phiale

Paternus, potter, ii. 527

_Patina_, ii. 456, 468

Patroklos, ii. 123, 126, 130;
  games for, ii. 131;
  tomb of, ii. 131

Patroni on Italian vases, i. 467, 479, 483, ii. 323 ff.

Patterns, see Ornamental

Pausanias on use of brick and terracotta in Greece, i. 92, 98, 100;
  on the chest of Kypselos, ii. 236

Pavements, tiles used in, ii. 350

Pediment-style of composition, ii. 207

Pegasos, ii. 79, 114, 148

Peirithoös, ii. 111

Peisistratos, i. 304, 369

Peithinos, vase-painter, i. 421, 438

Peitho, ii. 42, 49

Peleus, ii. 120, 142

Pelias, funeral games for, i. 319, ii. 116

“Pelike,” i. 163, 411

p???a, i. 186, 391;
  and cf. ii. 239

Pelops, ii. 113, 195

p????, i. 89

_Pelvis_, ii. 469

Penelope, ii. 135

Pentathlon, ii. 163

Penteskouphia, pinakes from, i. 51, 139, 316

Penthesileia, ii. 132

Pentheus, ii. 56, 142

Perennius, M., potter, ii. 483, 492, 494

Persephone, ii. 26 ff., 67, 189

Perseus, ii. 112, 195

Persia, vases from, i. 64

Persians on vases, i. 420, ii. 151, 179

Personal names on vases, ii. 92, 260

Personifications on vases, ii. 77 ff.

Perspective, conventional, i. 286, 312;
  on R.F. vases, i. 398;
  on South Italian, i. 470

Perugia, vases from, i. 73

Peucetians on vases, i. 487;
  pottery of, ii. 323 ff.

Phaestos, pottery from, i. 60, 264

Phaëthon on Arretine vase, ii. 483

Phaidra, ii. 112

Phaleron ware, i. 49, 298

Phanagoria, vases from, i. 61, 340

Phaon, ii. 142

Pheidias, see Parthenon

Pheidippos, vase-painter, i. 424

Phiale, i. 140, 191, 490, 502;
  and see _Patera_

Philoktetes, ii. 124

Philomela, ii. 139

Phineus, i. 136, ii. 81, 115, 143;
  cup with subject of, i. 357, ii. 203

Phintias, vase-painter, i. 421, 428, ii. 259

f??a?e?, i. 85, 473, ii. 160

Phobos on vases, ii. 90, 199;
  on lamps, ii. 398

Phocaea, vases from, i. 62, 64, 254;
  as centre of fabric, i. 354, 360

Phoenicians, in Cyprus, i. 247 ff.;
  influence of, on Etruria, ii. 296, 303

_Phoenissae_ of Euripides, scenes from, i. 500, ii. 414, 415, 421

Phoinix, ii. 126, 128

Phokis, pottery from, i. 53

Pholos, ii. 102, 146

Phosphoros, ii. 79

f????, meaning of, i. 215

Phrynos, potter, i. 379, 384

Phthonos, ii. 49

Phylakopi, pottery of, i. 57, 262

Physical conceptions personified, ii. 77 ff., 84

Physiognomy, treatment of, on vases, ii. 202 ff.

Pictorial style on vases, i. 409, 440 ff., 450, 470

Pile Cinq-Mars, ii. 337

Pinakes, Corinthian, i. 51, 207, 216, 217 316, ii. 170, 249;
  Rhodian, i. 335

Pinax, i. 194;
  votive, i. 139, 454, and see Pinakes;
  with subject of Euphorbos, i. 335, ii. 249

Pindar quoted, i. 132;
  comparison of, with vase-subjects, ii. 6

Pipes of terracotta, i. 109, ii. 347 ff.

Pisa, vases from, i. 72

Pisticci, vases from, i. 83

Pistillus, potter, ii. 383

Pistoxenos, potter, i. 423

Pitane, vases from, i. 62, 339

Pitcher, see Hydria, Kalpis

???????a, ii. 156

Pithos, i. 57, 147, 151 ff., 209, 216;
  with reliefs, i. 496, ii. 292;
  Etruscan, ii. 292, 300

Pit-tombs of Etruria, ii. 284 ff.

p?a?s???, i. 96

Plastic art, i. 6, 110;
  nature of clay, i. 5;
  principle in pottery, i. 238, 256, 257, 267, 310, 491 ff.;
  and see Modelling of vases

Plautus quoted, ii. 456, 463, 476

Plicque on Lezoux pottery, ii. 525 ff.

p??????, i. 94, 95

Pliny, traditions recorded by, i. 91, 92, 98, 110;
  on early Greek painting, i. 320, 394 ff.;
  on terracotta in Italy, ii. 313, 314, 371, 372;
  on Roman pottery, ii. 475

Ploutos, ii. 85

_Poculum_, i. 180, ii. 467

p?da??pt??, i. 176

Poinae, ii. 69, 90

Poli (Marion), vases from, i. 67, 250, 255

Polledrara ware, ii. 297 ff.;
  at Naukratis, i. 347

Pollentia, pottery of, i. 71, ii. 477

Pollux on names of vases, i. 149 ff.

Polychrome painting, i. 224, 256, 449, 456;
  at Naukratis, i. 348;
  in Southern Italy, i. 484;
  in Etruria, ii. 299

Polydeukes, see Dioskuri

Polygnotos, painter, i. 15, 409, 421, 441 ff., 459, ii. 202, 209;
  vases in style of, i. 443

—— vase-painter, i. 421, 445

Polykleitos, i. 112

Polymestor, ii. 135

Polyphemos, ii. 136

Polyxena, i. 326, ii. 125, 135
Pomarico, vases from, i. 83
Pomegranate-patterns, ii. 222
Pompeii, wine-amphorae from, i. 158, ii. 462;
  paintings of, relation to vases, i. 471, 485;
  bricks used at, ii. 337;
  tiles used at, ii. 342 ff.;
  mural reliefs from, ii. 367;
  terracotta statues from, ii. 374;
  statuettes, ii. 375, 378;
  miscellaneous terracotta objects, ii. 387;
  _echea_, ii. 458;
  Gaulish pottery at, ii. 522, 524

“Pontic” vases, i. 359

Popilius, C., potter, ii. 490

Porcelain vases, i. 126 ff.

Portraits on lamps, ii. 415

_Portus_ on tile-stamps, ii. 363

Poseidon on vases, ii. 22 ff., 188;
  in Gigantomachia, ii. 13 ff.;
  on Corinthian pinakes, i. 317, ii. 23;
  on lamps, ii. 409

_Post-Homerica_, scenes from, ii. 119 ff.

p?t?????, i. 180

Pothos, ii. 49

Potteries, Greek, i. 89, 233;
  scenes in, on vases, i. 208, 213, 216 ff., ii. 170;
  of tile-makers, ii. 356;
  at Arezzo, ii. 480 ff.;
  in Gaul, ii. 504, 533;
  importance of fixing sites of, ii. 441;
  and see Kerameikos

Potters represented on vases, i. 208, 209, 213, 216 ff., 422, ii. 260;
  in sculpture, ii. 511;
  list of Greek, ii. 273 ff.;
  names or stamps of, on terracottas, ii. 379 ff.;
  on lamps, ii. 406, 423 ff.;
  on Arretine ware, ii. 480 ff.;
  Gaulish, ii. 504, 509 ff., 522, 526;
  in Germany, ii. 510, 535;
  in Britain, ii. 542;
  on mortars, ii. 551;
  wheel used by, i. 7, 206

Pottery, invention of, i. 3 ff.;
  Palaeolithic and Neolithic, i. 4;
  characteristics of Greek, i. 9;
  primitive Greek, i. 64, 206, 237 ff., 256 ff.;
  Greek terms for, i. 89;
  use of, in daily life, i. 135 ff.;
  shapes, i. 148 ff., ii. 458 ff.;
  imitations of metal in, i. 201, 488, 492, 495 ff.,
  and see Metal;
  manufacture, 202 ff.;
  unpainted domestic, i. 252, ii. 548 ff.

Pottier on Greek vases, i. 9, 298, 305, 308, 330, 367;
  on Etruscan, ii. 281, 301

_Pozzo_-tombs in Etruria, ii. 284 ff.

Pozzuoli, see Puteoli

_Praedia_ on tile-stamps, ii. 355

_Praefericulum_, ii. 471

_Praefurnium_, ii. 466

Preimos, lamp-maker, i. 108

Pre-Mycenaean pottery in Greece, i. 256 ff.

Priam, ii. 127, 131, 134

Priapos, potter, i. 147

Prices of vases, i. 43 ff.;
  scratched under the foot, ii. 238 ff.

Primitive pottery in Cyprus, i. 236 ff.;
  in Greece, 256 ff.;
  in Etruria, ii. 284 ff.

Prize-vases, see Panathenaic

p??a???, i. 167

Processions, ii. 155;
  and see Judgment of Paris

p??????, i. 178

Prokles, potter, i. 493

Prokne, ii. 139

Prokrustes, ii. 109

Prometheus, ii. 75;
  as potter, ii. 378

p??p??sµata, i. 111, ii. 375, 378

Proteus, ii. 26, 136

p???es??, i. 142, 459, ii. 157

Prothesis-amphorae, i. 142, 159, ii. 157

Proto-Attic vases, i. 159, 292 ff.

Proto-Corinthian vases, i. 305 ff., ii. 254

Provincial Roman wares, ii. 497 ff.;
  as illustrating Roman art, ii. 508, 521

Psiax, vase-painter, i. 421, 429

???t??, i. 150, 172, 411

Psychostasia, ii. 130, 132

Ptolemies, representations of, i. 129

Ptolemy Euergetes quoted, ii. 455

Ptoös, finds at Mount, i. 287

_Pultarius_, ii. 472

Punctured patterns, i. 242

p??a????, i. 105

p?????a???, i. 215

Purple, use of, for details, i. 221, 231, 312, 371

“Pursuing” type on R.F. vases, i. 419

Puteals, terracotta used for, ii. 387

Puteoli as vase-centre, ii. 478, 492

Pygmies and cranes, ii. 149

Pyrrhos, potter, i. 308, ii. 254

Python, potter, i. 423, 434

—— vase-painter, i. 147, 478 ff., ii. 272

Pyxis, i. 198, 201, 412, 449;
  and see Dodwell


Raimondi, restorer of vases, i. 42

Rasinius Pisanus, L., potter, ii. 485, 523

Rattles, vases used as, i. 137

Reclining figures in terracotta, i. 124;
  on Etruscan sarcophagi, ii. 317, 321

Red glaze, Roman, ii. 435 ff., 497;
  on Greek sites, ii. 476, 498;
  and see Glaze

Red wares, Cypriote, i. 241, 251;
  Roman, plain, ii. 549

Red-bodied amphorae, i. 161, 221, 369

Red-figured vases, technique of, i. 221;
  found in Cyprus, i. 255;
  chronology of, i. 401;
  drawing, i. 406;
  shapes, i. 409 ff.;
  ornamentation, i. 412 ff., ii. 234;
  subjects, i. 416 ff.;
  arrangement of subjects on, ii. 208;
  relation to B.F., i. 368, 386, 393, 400;
  Etruscan imitations of, ii. 309

Regulini-Galassi tomb at Cervetri, ii. 300

Reliefs, architectural, i. 98, ii. 315 ff., 343, 345;
  terracotta, i. 119;
  Roman mural, ii. 365 ff.;
  Greek vases with, i. 496 ff.;
  Etruscan vases with, ii. 292, and see _Bucchero_;
  method of producing, in Roman pottery, ii. 438 ff., 505;
  _appliqué_, at Lezoux, ii. 529;
  and see _Terra sigillata_

Religion of Greeks, i. 13, 138 ff., ii. 155;
  of Mycenaeans, i. 273

Religious uses of vases, i. 138;
  subjects on vases, ii. 154 ff.

????ta, i. 193

Restoration of vases, i. 40, 147

Revels on vases, ii. 182

Rextugenos, potter, ii. 384

Rheinzabern, stamps from, ii. 440;
  mould from, ii. 441;
  kilns at, ii. 446, 450;
  potteries of, ii. 504, 535;
  potters’ names at, ii. 510

Rheneia, vases from, i. 57, 302

Rhesos, ii. 128

Rhineland, terracottas from, ii. 380, 383;
  pottery of, ii. 498, 500 ff., 534 ff.

Rhodes, tombs of, i. 34, 121;
  vases found in, i. 58;
  terracottas from, i. 112, 121;
  p???? from, i. 152;
  wine-amphorae and stamps from, i. 155;
  typical oinochoë of, i. 177;
  Mycenaean vases from, i. 274, 276;
  Corinthian, i. 311;
  B.F. kylikes, i. 357;
  vases with reliefs, i. 497

Rhodian pottery, i. 333 ff.;
  ornamentation, i. 334, ii. 225, 231, 233;
  “mixed” technique of, i. 338;
  found at Troy, i. 339;
  compared with Naukratis, i. 345 ff.;
  influence on Proto-Attic, i. 294, 295

Rhoikos, i. 110

Rhone valley as pottery-centre, ii. 440, 498, 503, 530, 533

Rhyton, i. 127, 192, 201, 211, 410, 493, 494

Riegl on ornamentation of vases, ii. 223 ff.;
  on Mycenaean, i. 276

Ripanus Tiberinus, potter, ii. 551

River-gods, ii. 83, 194;
  and see Acheloös, Nile

Rivets for mending vases, i. 147

Roach-Smith on Roman pottery, ii. 503, 508, 529, 540, 542

Robert on Polygnotos, i. 442, 445;
  on Megarian bowls, i. 499

Roman art, illustrated in pottery, ii. 489, 494, 507, 508, 521, 544 ff.;
  porcelain ware, i. 129;
  subjects on mural reliefs, ii. 370;
  on lamps, ii. 407, 412, 416;
  villas in Britain, use of tiles in, ii. 346, 348;
  Wall, pottery from, ii. 540

—— pottery, uses of, ii. 387, 455 ff.;
  compared with Greek, ii. 430, 472;
  limits of subject, ii. 430 ff.;
  extent of use of, ii. 431, 433, 455, 473, 496;
  development of, from earlier, ii. 431, 432, 489 ff.;
  termination of, ii. 432, 495;
  technical processes, ii. 433 ff.;
  plain wares, ii. 437, 496, 547 ff.;
  kilns for, ii. 443 ff.;
  shapes and names, ii. 458 ff.;
  centres of manufacture, ii. 474 ff.;
  transition to provincial wares, ii. 496, 500 ff.;
  in Germany, ii. 504, 510, 536, 552;
  in Britain, ii. 540 ff.;
  and see Arretine, Gaul, Provincial wares

Romanensis, lamp-maker, i. 108, ii. 423, 427

Romano-British pottery, ii. 543 ff.;
  from Wroxeter, ii. 553

Rome, collections at, i. 29;
  pottery found at, i. 79, ii. 456, 461;
  use of terracotta at, for sculpture, ii. 314, 372;
  use of bricks and tiles at, ii. 331 ff.;
  stamped tiles from, ii. 352 ff.;
  evidence for dating buildings at, ii. 360;
  mural reliefs from, ii. 365;
  statuettes of terracotta in use at, ii. 376 ff.;
  use of lamps at, ii. 393, 396;
  as centre of lamp-fabric, ii. 427;
  _echea_ found at, ii. 457;
  as centre for pottery, ii. 477;
  Arretine stamps at, ii. 481 ff.;
  provincial wares at, ii. 498, 522

Roofs and roof-tiles of terracotta, i. 96 ff., ii. 315, 344, 345

Rosettes on vases, i. 312, 334, ii. 230

Rottenburg, inscribed vases from, ii. 512

_Rubrica_, i. 205, ii. 404

Russia, collections in, i. 28;
  vases from, i. 60;
  tiles from, i. 101;
  stamped wine amphorae from, i. 158;
  and see Kertch, Olbia

Rutenian pottery and potters, see Graufesenque

Rutenus, potter (?), ii. 510

Ruvo, vases found at, i. 83;
  furnace at, i. 215;
  as centre for Apulian vases, i. 486


Sabinus, potter, ii. 508

Sacrifices, vases used in, i. 140;
  representations of, ii. 155

_Saeculares_ on lamps, ii. 396, 398, 421

Saguntum as pottery-centre, ii. 479, 499, 540

St.-Rémy-en-Rollat, potteries of, ii. 382, 385, 516;
  clay of, ii. 434

Sakonides, vase-painter, i. 379, 384

Sala Consilina, local pottery from, ii. 324, 328

Salamis (Attica), personified, ii. 82;
  vases from, i. 54

—— (Cyprus), vases from, i. 66, 245;
  lamp from, ii. 409

Salmoneus, ii. 143

“Samian” ware, i. 57, 71, ii. 474 ff., 497

Samnium as pottery-centre, ii. 475

Samos, pottery of, i. 57, 336 ff., and see ii. 475

Sandwith on Cypriote pottery, i. 65, 240

sa???, i. 112, 122

Santa Agata dei Goti (Saticula), vases from, i. 81, 484

Sappho, ii. 144, 151

Sarapis on lamps, ii. 402, 409, 412

Sarcophagi of terracotta, i. 104, ii. 457;
  from Clazomenae, i. 62, 104, 362 ff.;
  Etruscan, ii. 317, 320 ff.

Sardinia, vases from, i. 88;
  and see Tharros

Sardis, pottery from, i. 64

Sarpedon, ii. 129

Sarteano, vases from, i. 73

Saticula, fabric of, i. 81, 484

Saturnalia, statuettes in connection with, ii. 376

Saturnus Balcaranensis, lamps from altar of, ii. 397

Satyric drama, subjects from, ii. 7, 161;
  mask of terracotta, i. 104, ii. 377

Satyrs, ii. 54 ff., 192;
  names of, ii. 65;
  Ionic, i. 353, 355;
  on R.F. vases, i. 416, 417;
  on mural reliefs, ii. 369;
  on lamps, ii. 411

Saurias of Samos, painter, i. 361

Scale-patterns, ii. 218;
  Corinthian, i. 311;
  Ionic, i. 338, 352

Schliemann’s excavations, i. 256

School-scenes on vases, i. 435, ii. 168, 263

Sculpture, in clay, i. 6, 110;
  Etruscan, ii. 313 ff.;
  at Rome, ii. 371;
  use of clay models in, ii. 375;
  in relation to vase-paintings, i. 15, 450

_Scutra_, ii. 470

_Scyphi Homerici_, i. 134, 185, 499, ii. 2

Scythians, on vases, ii. 179;
  dialect of (?), ii. 256

Sea-deities, ii. 25, 189;
  on Corinthian vases, i. 314, ii. 26, 189

Seasons on mural reliefs, ii. 368, 370;
  on Arretine vases, ii. 488, 493;
  and see Spring, Horae

Seianti Thanunia, sarcophagus of, ii. 322

Seileni, ii. 54 ff., 65, 161;
  and see Satyrs

Selene, ii. 78, 79, 193;
  on lamps, ii. 412

Selinus, tombs of, i. 37;
  vases from, i. 87

Selva la Rocca, vases from, i. 76

Semele, ii. 18, 56

Semitic nations, use of brick among, i. 6, 91;
  and see Assyrian, Oriental

Septimius Secundanus, C., potter, ii. 511

Sepulchral stelae compared with vases, i. 461, 477, ii. 158;
  and see Funeral, Tomb

“Severe” style of R.F. vases, i. 420, 422 ff.

Sexes, distinction of, on early vases, i. 317, 331;
  and see ii. 200

Shapes of vases, i. 13, 148 ff.;
  at Troy, i. 258;
  at Thera, i. 261;
  Mycenaean, i. 271;
  Geometrical, i. 281, 287;
  Proto-Attic, i. 293;
  Proto-Corinthian, i. 308;
  Corinthian, i. 313, 317;
  Rhodian. i. 334;
  Attic B.F., i. 372 ff.;
  R.F., i. 409 ff.;
  White-ground vases, i. 456;
  South Italian, i. 468, 481, 483, 485;
  Etruscan, ii. 285 ff., 302;
  local Italian, ii. 325 ff.;
  Roman, ii. 458 ff.;
  Arretine, ii. 488;
  provincial, ii. 500 ff., 505, 520, 526

Shields, devices on, ii. 198

Ships, ii. 178;
  on Dipylon vases, i. 285, 291;
  on lamps, ii. 417

“Short-hand” system of indicating landscape, etc., ii. 204 ff.

Sicily, history of, in relation to vases, i. 11;
  tombs in, i. 37;
  vases from, i. 86, 307, 311;
  terracotta architecture of, i. 100

Sigeion, vases from, i. 61

_Sigilla_, ii. 375 ff.

_Sigillaria_, ii. 376

_Sigillarius_, ii. 511

Signatures, forms of, i. 379, 422 ff., ii. 257 ff.;
  of Gaulish potters, ii. 381, 509;
  of German potters, ii. 510;
  of lamp-makers, ii. 423 ff., 427

Sikanos, potter, i. 420, 424

Sikelos, vase-painter, i. 391

Sikyon, vases from, i. 51;
  alphabet of, i. 321, 381, ii. 252;
  painters of school of, i. 395

Silchester, pottery from, ii. 522

Silhouette paintings on vases, i. 220, 285, 396, 455;
  on Clazomenae sarcophagi, i. 362

Silphium at Kyrene, i. 342

Silver, vases coated with, i. 74, 189, 501

Simonides quoted, i. 132

_Simpulum_, _simpuvium_, ii. 471

Singing on vases, ii. 169, 182;
  inscriptions denoting, ii. 261

Sinis, ii. 109

_Sinus_, ii. 465

Sipylos, pottery from, i. 64

Sirens, ii. 147, 196

Sisyphos, ii. 68;
  and cf. ii. 264

Situla, i. 165, ii. 464;
  from Daphnae, i. 350

s??f?, i. 175

Skiron, ii. 109

s??f??, i. 184

Skylla, ii. 26, 148, 189

sµ?µat?????, i. 198

Smikros, vase-painter, i. 421, 440, ii. 259

Smith (Cecil) on Proto-Attic vases, i. 294;
  on R.F. vases, i. 407;
  on Polledrara ware, ii. 300

Smithy of Hephaistos, ii. 37, 171

Social advantages, etc., personified, ii. 85, 91

s????e?, i. 96

Solygea, vase from, i. 51

Sophilos, vase-painter, i. 379, 380

Sorrento, vases from, i. 82

Sosias, potter, i. 421, 439

Sotades, potter, i. 191, 410, 421, 445, 457

Southern Italy, see Apulia, Campania, Lucania, Italy

Spain, Roman pottery in, ii. 479, 480, 540

Sparta personified, ii. 82

Spata, pottery from, i. 49

Sphinx, i. 249, ii. 147, 196;
  Theban, ii. 117

Spiral patterns, i. 292, 302, 375, ii. 217

Sporades, pottery from, i. 57

Sport on vases, ii. 165

Spring, stamp with figure of, ii. 439, 493;
  and see Seasons

Stackelberg, i. 18, 42, 48

Stage, subjects from, see Drama

Stag-hunts, ii. 165

st?µ???, i. 163, 411;
  from Daphnae, i. 352

Stamped patterns on Greek vases, i. 212

Stamps on bricks and tiles, ii. 352 ff.;
  in the provinces, ii. 357;
  military, ii. 363 ff.;
  on _dolia_, ii. 459;
  on wine-amphorae, i. 155 ff., ii. 461 ff.;
  for figures in Roman pottery, ii. 438;
  and see Inscriptions, Signatures

Stars, ii. 79

_Stationes_ on tile-stamps, ii. 362

Statues of terracotta, i. 109, ii. 371 ff.

Statuettes of terracotta, Greek, i. 110 ff.;
  Roman, ii. 375 ff.;
  Gaulish, ii. 379 ff.

ste?ast??e?, i. 96

_Stelae_ with inscriptions on vases, ii. 272;
  and see Sepulchral

“Still-life” subjects, ii. 185

Stone Age, pottery of, i. 4, 9;
  and see Neolithic

Strabo quoted, i. 50, 134

_Strenae_, ii. 398

“Strong” period of R.F. vases, i. 417, 421

Studniczka on Cyrenaic vases, i. 341

Study of Greek vases, its uses, i. 10 ff.;
  its history, i. 16 ff.

Stymphalian birds, ii. 98

Subjects on vases, i. 12 ff.;
  interpretation of, i. 21, ii. 8;
  relation to literature, ii. 1 ff.;
  arrangement of, ii. 206 ff.;
  Mycenaean, i. 272;
  Dipylon, i. 286;
  Proto-Attic, i. 296;
  Melian, i. 301;
  Proto-Corinthian, i. 309;
  Corinthian, i. 314 ff.;
  Black-figured, i. 376 ff.;
  Red-figured, i. 416 ff.;
  White-ground, i. 457;
  South Italian, i. 474 ff.;
  Campanian, i. 483;
  Etruscan, ii. 292, 302, 309;
  Arretine, ii. 492 ff.;
  provincial, ii. 507, 521, 544;
  on lamps, ii. 408 ff.;
  on mural reliefs, ii. 368 ff.

Sub-Mycenaean pottery, i. 246

Suetonius quoted, i. 134, ii. 336

Sumlocene, vases from colony of, ii. 512

Sun-dried bricks, i. 89 ff., ii. 331, 333

Susa (Persia), vase from, i. 64

Swallow-scene, ii. 185, 262

Swimming-scenes, ii. 173

Syra, pottery from, i. 262

Syracuse, vases from, i. 86, 307


Taleides, potter, i. 379, 380

Talos, ii. 116

Tamassos, vase from, i. 249

Tanagra, vases from, i. 53, 451;
  terracottas from, i. 112, 116, 124.

Tantalos, ii. 68

Taras, ii. 144, 160

Tarentum, vases from, i. 85;
  moulds from, i. 115;
  f??a?e? at, i. 473;
  as centre of pottery (?), i. 486, 488, ii. 324

Tarragona, Roman pottery from, ii. 479, 480, 540

Tarsus, lamps from, i. 108;
  enamelled wares from, i. 129

Tataie lekythos, i. 80, ii. 242

Taygeta, ii. 19, 82

Technical processes, for terracottas, i. 113 ff.;
  for Greek vases, i. 202 ff.;
  for lamps, ii. 405;
  for Roman pottery, ii. 433 ff.;
  for Romano-British, ii. 545;
  miscellaneous details, B.F., i. 370;
  R.F., i. 405, 449;
  White-ground, i. 455;
  South Italian, i. 470

_Tegulae_, i. 96, ii. 340;
  _bessales_, ii. 332, 348;
  _bipedales_, ii. 332, 337, 339, 346, 351;
  _colliciares_, _deliciares_, ii. 341;
  _mammatae_, ii. 341, 346;
  _sesquipedales_, ii. 332;
  and see Tiles

Telemachos, ii. 136

Telephos, ii. 125

Tell-el-Amarna, pottery from, i. 67

_Tempera_ painting, i. 117, 119, ii. 321, 367

Temples, use of terracotta for, in Greece, i. 92 ff.;
  in Italy, i. 98, 101, ii. 314;
  lamps used in, ii. 397

Tenea, vases from, i. 51

Teos, pottery of, i. 64

Tereus, ii. 139

_Terra sigillata_, term explained, ii. 434; and see i. 503, ii. 474,
   496;
  in Greece, ii. 476, 498;
  provincial, ii. 497 ff.;
  centres of fabric of, ii. 503;
  Rutenian, ii. 520;
  at Banassac, ii. 525;
  at Lezoux, ii. 526;
  in Germany, ii. 534;
  in Britain, ii. 540;
  combined with barbotine, ii. 529;
  termination of, in Italy, ii. 495;
  in the provinces, ii. 508, 526

Terracotta, use of, for bricks, i. 7, ii. 334 ff.;
  for tiles, i. 96 ff., ii. 341 ff.;
  in architecture, Greek, i. 92 ff.;
  Etruscan, ii. 314 ff.;
  at Rome and Pompeii, ii. 343 ff.;
  for pipes, i. 103, ii. 349;
  in tombs, i. 104, ii. 351;
  for sarcophagi, i. 104, 362 ff., ii. 317, 320 ff., 457;
  for coin-moulds, i. 106, ii. 390 ff.;
  for impressions for seals, i. 106;
  for models for statues, i. 111, ii. 375;
  miscellaneous uses, i. 90, 105, ii. 387 ff.;
  Greek terms for, i. 89;
  invention of modelling and moulding, i. 110;
  vases of, i. 118, 146, 201;
  reliefs, i. 119, ii. 365 ff.;
  antefixal ornaments, i. 97 ff., ii. 315, 317, 343;
  architectural sculpture in Etruria, ii. 317, 318;
  statues, i. 109, ii. 371 ff.;
  statuettes, i. 112 ff., ii. 375 ff.;
  Boeotian, i. 290;
  Etruscan, ii. 313 ff.;
  Gaulish, ii. 379 ff.;
  Roman, ii. 373 ff.;
  types, i. 121 ff.;
  methods of manufacture, i. 113 ff., ii. 378;
  use of colour for, i. 116. ii. 321, 322;
  painted panels, i. 92, ii. 299, 319;
  use of, as substitute for metal, i. 495 ff., ii. 431, 455

Terramare civilisation, ii. 283

Terranuova, see Gela

_Testa_, ii. 331, cf. 350

Teucheira, vases from, i. 69

Textiles, influence of, i. 312, 333, ii. 211

Thaleia, ii. 19

Thamyris, ii. 144

Thanatos, ii. 71, 84, 193

Tharros, vases from, i. 88;
  porcelain ware from, i. 128

Thasos, amphora-stamps from, i. 157;
  alphabet of, i. 443, ii. 271

Theatrical treatment of subjects, i. 470;
  subjects on vases, see Drama

Thebes, vases from, i. 52, 286, 390;
  personified, ii. 82, and see 83;
  legends of, ii. 116 ff.

Themis, ii. 74

Theocritus quoted, ii. 2

Theodoric, tiles of, ii. 355

Theokosmos, i. 92, 111

Theozotos, potter, i. 52, 301

Thera, finds in, i. 56;
  p???? from, i. 153;
  early pottery of, i. 260 ff.;
  connection with Crete, i. 264;
  Mycenaean vases from, i. 270

Thericleian kylikes, i. 189

?e?µa?t??, i. 175

Thermon metopes, i. 92

?e?µ?p?t??, i. 169, 175

Thersites, ii. 126, 132; and see i. 215

Theseus, on R.F. vases, i. 417, 432, 442;
  with Minotaur, ii. 109, 298;
  labours of, ii. 108 ff.;
  in Hades, ii. 68, 111;
  in Crete, ii. 110;
  at Athens, ii. 111

Thessaly, pottery from, i. 54

Thetis, ii. 120, 130

Thiersch on Tyrrhenian amphorae, i. 324 ff.

Thoas, ii. 143

Thracians, ii. 143, 179, 200;
  and see ii. 166

Thypheithides, potter, i. 147

Tickets of terracotta, ii. 388

Tigranes, potter, ii. 483

Tiles, Greek, i. 96 ff.;
  inscribed, i. 101, 102;
  used for tombs, i. 104

—— Roman, used as bricks, ii. 331;
  for other purposes, ii. 341;
  in Roman walls in Britain, ii. 332;
  later use of, ii. 335;
  varieties of, ii. 332, 341;
  flanged, ii. 341, 342;
  for roofs, ii. 342 ff.;
  ornamental, ii. 343;
  used for warming, ii. 346 ff.;
  for pavements, ii. 350;
  for tombs, ii. 351;
  potteries for, ii. 356;
  inscriptions on, ii. 351 ff., 357 ff., 363 ff.;
  military, ii. 351, 363;
  from Central Europe, ii. 357 ff.;
  from Britain, ii. 342, 346, 348, 350, 359, 363;
  chronological evidence of, ii. 360 ff.

Timagoras, potter, i. 379, 383

Timonidas, vase-painter, i. 315, 317, ii. 251

Tiryns, finds at, i. 51

Tischbein, i. 17

Titius, A., Arretine potter, ii. 480, 485

Tityrus on lamps, ii. 416

Tleson, potter, i. 379, 383

Toilet-scenes on vases, i. 475, ii. 172, 173;
  and see Aphrodite, Helen

Tomb, cult of, on vases, i. 143 ff., 459 ff., 477, ii. 158

Tombs, Greek, i. 33 ff.;
  Cypriote, i. 35, 237, 250, 255, 256;
  in Cyrenaica, i. 36;
  in Sicily, i. 37;
  in Italy, i. 37 ff.;
  in Dipylon at Athens, i. 280;
  in Etruria, ii. 284 ff.;
  _a pozzo_, ii. 284;
  _a fossa_, ii. 289;
  _a camera_, ii. 294;
  of large size, ii. 300;
  arrangement of vases in, i. 38;
  vases used in, i. 143 ff., ii. 456, 550;
  tiles used for, ii. 351;
  lamps used in, ii. 397;
  forms of, as depicted on vases, ii. 157, 158

Tongue-pattern, i. 375, ii. 219

Tools used in painting vases, i. 227 ff.;
  by Roman potters, ii. 437 ff.

Torch-race, ii. 164

Toreutic work, influence of, on Arretine ware, ii. 489

Towneley, terracottas collected by, ii. 366, 373

Toys, of terracotta, i. 120;
  vases used as, i. 137;
  representations of, on vases, ii. 167

Trades on vases, ii. 169 ff.

Tradition, literary and artistic, compared, i. 13, ii. 3 ff.

Tragedy and vase-paintings, i. 471, ii. 7, 162

t?a???af??, i. 193

_Traits reservés_, i. 362

Treasury of Gela at Olympia, terracotta used in, i. 100

Trench-tombs in Etruria, ii. 289

Trier as pottery-centre, ii. 502, 534, 536

t??????, i. 186

Triptolemos, ii. 27, 189

Triton, ii. 25, 101, 189

Triumphs, lamps used in, ii. 396

Troad, pottery from, i. 61, 153, 330, 339;
  and see Troy

t?????at??, of lamps, i. 107

Troilos, i. 433, ii. 125

Trojan subjects on vases, i. 322, 335, ii. 4, 119 ff.;
  on mural reliefs, ii. 370;
  on lamps, ii. 414

Troy, finds at, i. 61, 256, 339;
  early pottery of, i. 257 ff., and see 491;
  compared with Cypriote, i. 238, 240, 243;
  Sack of, on vases, ii. 133

_Trua_, _trulla_, ii. 470

t??ß????, i. 194

Tudot on Gaulish terracottas, ii. 380 ff.

_Tuguria_, ii. 288

Tychios, potter, i. 379, 383

Tydeus, ii. 118

Types on B.F. vases, i. 377, 388;
  on R.F., i. 418 ff.;
  distinctions of, ii. 187 ff.

Typhon, ii. 12, 149

Tyrrhenian amphorae, i. 160, 324 ff.

Tyrrhenians, ii. 281

Tyszkiewicz on forgeries, i. 42;
  on vase from Vulci, i. 77


Umbrian civilisation, ii. 282

Under-world on vases, i. 476, ii. 66 ff., 159;
  types of persons in, ii. 192;
  and see Hades

Upchurch ware, ii. 546

_Urceus_, ii. 465

_Urna_, ii. 464

Ussing on vase-shapes, i. 150 ff.


_Vallisneria spiralis_, i. 272, ii. 224

Varnish, black, i. 219 ff., 369, 371, 405 ff.

Vase-painters, i. 219 ff., 379 ff., 405 ff., 421 ff.

Vase-paintings, early interpretations of, i. 21;
  technical aspects of, i. 219 ff.;
  later study of, i. 235;
  earliest Greek, i. 239, 260, 265 ff.;
  decadence of, i. 462 ff., 487 ff.;
  relations of, to the drama, ii. 159 ff.;
  to literature in general, ii. 1 ff.;
  to Greek mythology, i. 13;
  to painting, i. 14, 320, 395 ff., 440 ff., 471;
  to sculpture, i. 15, 450

Vases, Greek painted, value of study of, i. 10 ff.;
  exportations of, to Italy, i. 11, 467;
  early publications of, i. 16 ff.;
  collections of, i. 17, 23 ff.;
  alleged Etruscan origin of, i. 18 ff., 79;
  classification, i. 22, 219 ff.;
  discovery of, and arrangement in tombs, i. 33 ff.;
  restorations and imitations, i. 39 ff.;
  prices paid for, i. 43 ff.;
  found in Italy, i. 71 ff.;
  mention of, in literature, i. 132 ff.;
  uses of, i. 135 ff.;
  repair of, in antiquity, i. 147;
  shapes of, i. 148 ff.;
  manufacture, i. 202 ff.;
  primitive, i. 256 ff.;
  influence of, in Etruria, ii. 289 ff., 296 ff., 307 ff., 320;
  compared with Roman, ii. 430, 472

Vaults, use of jars for, ii. 457

Vechten, pottery found at, ii. 522, 539

Vegetable ornament on vases, i. 312, ii. 221 ff.

Veii (Isola Farnese), Campana tomb at, i. 38, ii. 320;
  vases from, i. 75;
  sculptors in terracotta from, ii. 372

Velius Primus, Q., potter, ii. 377

Velleia as pottery-centre, ii. 477

Venice, forgeries made at, i. 41

Venus, Gaulish, ii. 385;
  on provincial wares, ii. 507, 508;
  and see Aphrodite

Vetulonia, early remains at, ii. 284;
  _Tomba del Duce_ at, ii. 300

Victors in contests, ii. 164, 169, 417

Victory, see Nike

Vienna, collections at, i. 28

Vienne as pottery-centre, ii. 441, 530

Villanuova civilisation in Etruria, i. 292, ii. 284 ff.

Vindex, potter, ii. 383, 426

Vitalis, potter, ii. 522

Vitellius, story of, ii. 456

Viterbo, vases from, i. 74

Vitruvius quoted, on bricks and tiles, ii. 331, 333, 335, 339;
  on terracotta sculpture, ii. 371, 372;
  on _echea_, ii. 457

Vivenzio vase, i. 45, 146, 438, ii. 134

Volca of Veii, ii. 314

Volterra, vases from, i. 72

Volutes on nozzles of lamps, ii. 400

Votive lamps, ii. 397;
  offerings, ii. 156;
  tablets, i. 51, 139, 316, 454, ii. 156, and see Pinax;
  vases, i. 138, ii. 242

Vourva vases, i. 50, 295, 299, 324

Vulci, excavations at, i. 19, 76 ff.;
  tombs at, i. 37, 78, ii. 287, 291, 294;
  and see Polledrara


Warrior, tomb of, ii. 158;
  on painted pinax, i. 397, 454

Warrior-vase (Mycenaean ?), i. 297

Warriors, on vases, i. 285, 475, 483, ii. 175 ff., 198;
  Italian, i. 475, 483, ii. 180;
  Oriental, ii. 178, 179;
  race of, armed, ii. 164;
  on lamps, ii. 417

Wave-pattern, ii. 218

Weddings, see Marriage

Wedgwood, i. 20, 41

Westerndorf, pottery of, ii. 504, 507, 535;
  potters’ stamps at, ii. 520

Wheel, for cutting patterns, ii. 441;
  potter’s, i. 7, 206, ii. 437;
  earliest vases made on, in Greece, i. 260, 266;
  in Etruria, ii. 290

White paint used for details, i. 294, 331, 355, 371, 407, 470

White slip, use of, for painting, i. 397;
  and see ?e???µa

White wares, Cypriote, i. 243, 244, 246, 251;
  Romano-British, ii. 553

White-ground vases, i. 224, 454 ff.

Wicks of lamps, i. 107, ii. 395, 403

Wide on Mycenaean pottery, i. 276;
  on Geometrical, i. 278 ff.

Wilisch on Corinthian vases, i. 304 ff.

Winckelmann, i. 16, 19, 79

Winds, ii. 80, 194

Wine-amphorae, i. 154 ff., ii. 460 ff.

Winged figures, i. 460, ii. 72, 90, 193, 194

Witte (J. de), i. 23

Women, games of, ii. 167;
  as dancers, ii. 169;
  as jugglers, ii. 174, 182;
  life of, on vases, ii. 172 ff.;
  dress of, ii. 200 ff.

Wrestlers, ii. 163

Writing materials, use of clay for, i. 7

Wroxeter, Romano-British pottery from, ii. 553


Xanten (Castra Vetera), pottery from, ii. 500, 501, 522, 534

Xanthippos on _ostrakon_, i. 12, 103

Xenokles, potter, i. 374, 379, 383

Xenophantos, potter, i. 61, 421, 447, 464

Xenotimos, potter, i. 421, 444

??a??? in terracotta, i. 110, 122;
  of Hera, ii. 21;
  of Apollo, ii. 34;
  of Artemis, ii. 35;
  of Athena, ii. 40;
  of Dionysos, ii. 60


Yellow wares, plain Roman, ii. 548

York, stamp from, ii. 439;
  pottery from, ii. 443, 540


Zagreus, ii. 74

Zakro, pottery from, i. 60, 268

?e???, ii. 179, 200

Zephyros, ii. 80

Zetes, see Boreades

Zethos, ii. 117

Zeus on vases, ii. 17 ff., 188;
  in Gigantomachia, ii. 13, 14;
  at birth of Athena, ii. 15;
  ???e???, ii. 18;
  weighing souls of heroes, ii. 130, 132;
  on mural reliefs, ii. 369;
  on lamps, ii. 408

Zeuxis, i. 441, 471

Zigzag patterns, see Chevrons

                  *       *       *       *       *

    _Printed by Hazell, Watson & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury._




                          Transcriber’s Note:

Errors which can be attributed to printer’s mistakes have been
corrected, as noted below. Lapses in punctuation are corrected with no
further mention.

The author has included as Fig. 173 a table of alphabets used on Greek
vases.

Inscriptions are presented in archaic Greek script, which more or less
follows that table. For instance, the character for pi (?) resembles
the modern gamma (G). All inscriptions are given using modern Greek
characters. References to individual characters may appear with very
brief descriptions, derived where possible from that table. The
character upsilon (?) frequently appears as a modern Roman V. On
occasion, sigma appears in the form of a modern C (the lunate sigma ?).

Footnotes, which were numbered sequentially on each page, have been
resequenced to be unique across the text. Cross-references to those
numbers in the text have been changed to reflect this. The notes
themselves have been moved to the end of each chapter.

Each plate was followed by a blank page on its verso, which have been
removed here. The position of each plate, as well as that of all other
figures, has been adjusted slightly to avoid falling in mid-paragraph.
The pages devoted to plates were not counted in pagination.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The following anomalies regarding footnotes were observed:

On p. 31, note 108, the reference to Overbeck’s _Kunstmythologie Atlas_
failed to italicize “Atlas”.

On p. 72, the reference to footnote (882) is missing from the text. The
reference has been added at the end of the paragraph ending with “he
floats through the air fully armed, with large wings.” The description
of item B 240, referred to in the note, from a contemporary edition of
_A Catalogue of the Greek and Etruscan Vases in the British Museum_
agrees with this characterization.

On p. 458, the footnote number for 3184 was missing and has been
replaced.

The following table contains those textual issues which are readily
attributed to printer’s errors:

 p. 138  n. 1421   Pylades at [o/O]mphalos        Corrected.

 p. 345            [r]idge-tiles                  Missing ‘r’. Possibly
                                                  ‘edge’





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of History of Ancient Pottery.  Volume 2
(of 2), by H. B. Walters

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF ANCIENT POTTERY, VOL 2 ***

***** This file should be named 48155-0.txt or 48155-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/8/1/5/48155/

Produced by KD Weeks, Chris Curnow and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


